Ministry of Energy Cabinet Secretary Amb. Dr. Monica Juma (second left) flanked by other officials in the energy sector during a media briefing on April 14, 2022. PHOTO | DIANA NGILA | NMG The State should review its approach to cushioning Kenyans from the rising cost of energy in the country. Our position has been that the fuel subsidy programme is not sustainable and can only be used as a temporary measure. Now the government has admitted that paying oil majors to keep the prices of fuel low is eating up significant resources. Energy Cabinet Secretary Monica Juma has said that the government will discontinue the fuel subsidy programme pointing to costly petrol and a further increase in the cost of basic goods and services in the coming months. Dr Juma said on Thursday that the spike in global prices of crude past the $100 per barrel has strained the fuel stabilisation fund due to the sharp rise in compensation to oil majors to keep pump prices low. The escalating cost of global crude following the invasion of Ukraine by Russia will have serious repercussions on the local economy if the government does not find a sustainable solution. Inflation already hit a 27-month high in May on the back of a jump in the price of essential items like cooking oil, food, fuel and soap, squeezing household budgets and demand for goods and services. We still maintain that the government can suspend some taxes to reduce the cost of energy, especially now that the Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) is surpassing its annual targets. The KRA expects to beat its initial revenue collection target for the current fiscal year by up to Sh140 billion, driven by an improved collection of consumption and income taxes as the economy continues its post-Covid recovery. The taxman is collecting Sh62.89 on every litre of petrol, a 39 percent jump in tax collections over the past two years that has made the Kenya Revenue Authority a key beneficiary of the surge in pump prices. But at what cost to the consumer? It would be necessary to remove some of the levies on fuel to cushion Kenyans who are already feeling the weight of the high cost of living.