Mozzartbet Kenya manager Mr Sasa Krneta at a past event at Golden Tulip Hotel in Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG Betting firm MozzartBet has moved to court to freeze the accounts of a supplier over Sh256 million allegedly paid for the purchase of software used in the gambling business. The betting firm says Kimaco Connections Ltd failed to deliver the IT platform even after receiving the funds in February 2020. It has sought the freezing of three bank accounts at DTB, Co-operative Bank and NCBA. The move comes two months after MozzartBet lost more than Sh300 million after the High Court declared the funds as proceeds of crime. “Despite the substantial payment against the invoices, the defendant did not supply the goods and no justifiable reason has been advanced for the delay in the performance of its obligations,” Mr Rodney Rono, a representative of the firm said in an affidavit. Justice Esther Maina had in April ruled that the money held in three bank accounts was part of a money-laundering scheme and should be forfeited to the government. “The applicant (Assets Recovery Agency) has adduced evidence that proves that the 1st respondent (Kimaco Connections ltd) was a shell company incapable of even paying rent for the premises it occupied,” the Judge said. The judge wondered why the betting firm would pay a third party to procure the software, from a sister company, unless the intention was to launder money. Assets Recovery Agency (ARA) said MozzartBet used its Paybill number 290059 to send the money to Kimaco Connections to its Paybill 311372 and sent a total of Sh256 million within five days, flagging the funds as suspicious. The funds were later moved to an account at Co-operative Bank. Despite defending the millions saying it had contracted Kimaco to supply an IT software for use in the betting business, the court dismissed the defence and forfeited the money to the government. In the later application filed before the Commercial division of the High Court, MozzartBet has sought to block Kimaco from operating or dealing with the money in the three bank accounts. The betting firm says the delay in delivery of the software shows that the contract was tainted with deception. The firm says the supplier alleged that a multi-agency team was investigating its financial dealings, and hence failed to deliver the software, but MozzartBet says the investigations are not a justification for failure to perform its obligations. Mr Rono says the project ought to have been completed within 24 months. skiplagat@ke.nationmedia.com