In a well-functioning digital economy, consumers should be able to make autonomous and informed purchasing decisions, while the companies providing the goods and services in the market should compete fairly in their quest to attract customers. One of the barriers preventing this from happening are dark patterns which, from a layman’s perspective, refer to false and misleading marketing through omission and/or manipulation of information. These are deceptive techniques resident in digital interfaces, especially mobile apps and websites, that intentionally mislead consumers to click, subscribe or buy something, thereby denying them an opportunity to follow their preferences. Dark patterns, unlike genuine marketing techniques, manipulate consumers into making decisions they would not have made if they were fully informed and accorded ample opportunity to choose between alternatives. For a consumer to be deemed to have made an informed purchasing choice, they should possess sufficient information regarding a product or service, including fees and charges. This right is enshrined in the Constitution of Kenya and buttressed by the Competition Act which outlaws undertakings from making misleading claims and unconscionable conduct against consumers. Dark commercial patterns typically play on human psychological frailties through modifying the choice architecture, through a range of possible design attributes that either alter the options available to consumer, or manipulate and restrict information flow. The consumer detriment resulting from these “smokescreen” tactics includes financial loss, breach of privacy, or an unnecessary cognitive burden. Eventually, there is reduced competition in markets and loss of trust in online businesses. Examples of dark commercial patterns include businesses misleading consumers to spend more money, increase time spent on a website, or unknowingly consent to tracking of online purchasing activities. A consumer’s default settings may also be exploited to sneak in additional items or charges into e-baskets at checkout without consent through a practice referred to drip pricing. At the Competition Authority of Kenya (CAK), some of the cases I have been involved in resolving include platforms forcing customers to pay for previously undisclosed delivery fees. The CAK has also ordered refunds to customers who fell victim to hidden loan charges by digital lenders. Other retailers engage in pressure selling and/or urgency and scarcity cues (i.e. misleading consumers that products/services are scarce in order to boost interest and drive sales), and flash sales (selling at considerably reduced prices within a short time), as well as deploy illegitimate user testimonials to secure customers. Consumers may also fall prey to deceptive adverts that navigate them to content that is materially different from that initially marketed. Another example is forced continuity and obstruction whereby, when free trial periods for a service expires, consumers’ debit or credit card are charged without warning. In other cases, undertakings make it laborious for customers to cancel subscriptions yet the onboarding process was effortless. Kenyans are also tricked into publicly sharing more personal information than initially intended. For instance, some terms and conditions in loyalty card programmes grant businesses permission to sell consumers’ personal data to third parties without further recourse to them. The major social media platforms have also been accused of such malicious practices. In 2019, the International Consumer Protection Enforcement Network conducted a sweep of over 1,700 websites/applications of online retail businesses across various sectors and flagged 25 per cent of them for ‘dark behavioral nudges’. The top practices identified were pressure selling, drip pricing, and design issues such as obscuring of terms and conditions. Following an upsurge in the e-commerce related complaints cases lodged by consumers, the CAK reviewed the terms and conditions of 30 online businesses in ten sectors and identified practices such as pressure selling, laborious cancellation policies, and hidden charges. The CAK required these e-commerce players to align their operations with the provisions of the Act, including reviewing terms and conditions to remove any unconscionable clauses, desisting from misleading advertisements, and implementing dispute resolution mechanisms. With the prevalent use of e-commerce platforms by Kenyans, it is imperative that businesses adopt healthy marketing practices, especially if consumers are at risk of suffering loss from the transaction. Further, they should ensure protection of consumer rights as enshrined under Article 46 (1) of the Kenyan Constitution, and adherence to financial consumer protection principles and practices such as timely disclosure and transparency in fees and charges. Consumers on the other hand should remain vigilant while transacting online to avoid falling victim to such dark practices and where they do, invoke their right to restitution from the businesses in the first instance and, where dissatisfied, lodge a complaint with the CAK. This service is offered free of charge.