Refugees queue for food rations at the Dadaab refugee camp in northern Kenya. FILE PHOTO | NMG Stories and images of Ukrainian refugees escaping the war highlight the hypocrisy with which those fleeing danger and persecution are often treated. Commentators were quick to point out that Ukrainians had received a warmer welcome than those arriving on boats from a different continent. With refugee stories from Europe and the US making the headlines, it can be easy to forget that Africa, including countries like Kenya, play a significant role providing shelter and opportunity for refugees. About a third of the world’s refugees are on the continent while Kenya hosts almost half a million such population, almost all are out of sight, out of mind and out of the economy. While many countries are taking steps backwards on refugees, Kenya can show leadership and demonstrate the social and economic contribution refugees can make given a chance. Nobody wants to be a refugee. Conflict and persecution can disrupt the most promising, stable and successful lives, forcing one to seek safety and security. Despite the difficult living conditions in camps, refugees are grateful that Kenya has given them a safe harbour to regroup and — what they value most — a chance for their children to receive an education away from the violence and disruptions of war. For them, Kenya means hope. Unfortunately, for many refugees, that hope dims when they come face to face with restrictive policies limiting their movements outside camps, and their participation in the labor markets. Current policies also make it difficult for them to get a work permit or run a business, and register SIM cards and mobile money accounts. These policies mean previously successful people and youth rich with skills, education and enthusiasm turn to anything to survive while they wait for their lives to continue. Kenya has not always been so restrictive. In the 70s and 80s, refugees moved and worked freely across the country. Things became tougher in the 90s as larger influxes of refugees and a series of terror attacks prompted the securitisation of refugee policy. These restrictions leave many refugees perpetually dependent on assistance for food and other basic needs, while desiring to work and achieve financial independence. By locking out refugees from active economic activity, Kenyans lose out on the skills, experiences, and cultural contributions that they could offer. Blocking refugees from accessing services like mobile money only pushes them to conduct those transactions underground or encourages refugees to register using borrowed IDs. Countries around the world are starting to realise the benefits of enabling refugees to pursue self-reliance, by lifting restrictions on their movement, work, and use of finance. Kenya, too, has made a strong commitment to these ambitions by signing onto the 2019 Kampala Declaration on Jobs, Livelihoods and Self-Reliance, and by formalising commitments to opening opportunities for refugees through the Refugees Act, 2021. How things will change in practice under this new law remains unclear. The Act promises to enable refugees to contribute to social and economic development in the country by facilitating access to official documents. However, this still involves an entire process for work permit issuance, which can be a challenge. The Act still insists refugees live in undefined “designated areas”, presenting uncertainty for refugees who have been told the camps will be closed. Many Kenyans have experienced the value that refugees can bring. Musician Eric Wainaina, in his foreword to the new collection of refugee stories, recalls how his life was enriched by refugee teachers and friends. That friendship is what is called for now to realise the promise of the new Refugee Act. When refugees flee their homes, they lose their political voice. It is up to us Kenyans to speak up. If we do, we can make our country an example for the world as a place that restores hope, that allows refugees to rebuild their lives, care for their families, and to contribute to the development of Kenya as neighbours, colleagues, and friends. Lilyanne Ndinda, national co-ordinator for Enterprise-ILO PROSPECTS; Kuria Wanjau is programme manager, Fragile Communities and States at FSD Africa