Taxation is a major source of government revenue. Tax policies are, therefore, geared towards the expansion of the tax base while promoting investment and trade. The Treasury through the Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) implements the prevailing tax laws and collects national taxes. The Parliament legislates while the Treasury enforces the tax laws. The Tax Procedures Act 2015 introduced measures to enhance transparency and accountability in accounting for taxes. Key company officers and leaders in an organisation are deemed to be tax representatives for purposes of administering tax laws. For instance, in the case of a company, the chief executive, managing director, company secretary, treasurer, trustee or a resident director or similar officer of the company acting or purporting to act in such a position are deemed to be tax representatives. On the other hand, in the case of an association of persons, individuals responsible for accounting for the receipt or payment of money or funds on behalf of the association are deemed to be tax representatives. For a partnership, partners or managers are also deemed to be tax representatives. The national and county governments, among other bodies, are not spared either with accounting officers being deemed as tax representatives. Individuals who act on behalf of non-resident persons are also caught by the law when they control the non-resident person’s affairs in Kenya, including a manager of a business of that non-resident person. What risks are these tax representatives exposed to? Tax planning initiatives are deemed to be legal while tax evasion is illegal and subject to penalties and interest. The law seeks to deter schemes or arrangements whose intention or effect is deemed to render a company unable to satisfy a current or future tax liability under tax law. Where an organisation is deemed to have entered into such an arrangement, every person who was a director or controlling member when it was entered into is jointly and severally liable for the tax liability of the company. The law, however, exonerates the directors, general manager, company secretary or other senior officer or controlling member if they did not derive financial or other benefits from the arrangement and if they notified the company in writing of their opposition to the arrangement on becoming aware of it and notified the KRA in writing. Alternatively, the director, general manager, company secretary, or other senior officer or controlling member must prove that they were not involved in the executive management of the company and had no knowledge of and could not reasonably have been expected to know of the arrangement. If the person that commits an offence under tax law is a firm, the offence is treated as having been committed by an individual who, at the time the offence was committed, was or was purporting to be the CEO, managing director, a director, company secretary, treasurer or other similar officers of the company. It is, therefore, imperative that directors and senior officers play a critical role in fostering tax compliance in their organisations. Indeed, tax compliance should be a substantive agenda for the board of directors. Views expressed herein are not necessarily those of EY