Crevit Mulier & Co-founder and Managing Director Lanji Ouko-Awori. PHOTO | POOL Law firm Crevit Mulier & Co has unveiled a programme to help gender-based violence (GBV) victims access impartial justice. The 10-year multi-sectoral project will, among other things, highlight loopholes that exists in the dispensation of GBV cases besides sensitizing judges and magistrates on the matter. To achieve this, it will undertake research, survivor & community outreach, judiciary sensitivity training and public prosecution & criminal justice system assessment. Others are multi-sectoral SGBV committee and an external review prior to tabulating policy recommendations. “A ten-year timeline may sound like plenty of time however, the framework has successfully completed phase 1 in our second and a half year, yet it feels as though we are barely scratching the surface.” said the firm's Head of Research & Training Yvonne Nzisa.  The law company is partnering with Oxfam GB to implement the project. “The project is strategic because it addresses patriarchal formal systems that indirectly perpetuate SGBV. A system strengthening approach is likely to give us sustainable outcomes in the fight against SGBV,” said Oxfam GB Director of Programmes Blandina Bobson. Crevit Mulier & Co is a law legal bureau that works to dispense fair and impartial administration of justice through litigation, research, training and publishing.  Its scope include economics, finance, health, digitization, criminology and mental health, psychology. Some of its legal milestones includes research on human resource sensitivity training at the Nairobi Women’s Hospital as well as the proposed trauma-informed judicial training.  "The project evaluates the gaps and loopholes of access to justice by survivors of violence regardless of age, status, class, gender or tribe. By focusing on the gender justice reform in the context of survivors, our overall aim is to improve the rate of reporting and improve public confidence in the criminal justice system “ Founder & Manning PartnerLanji Ouko-Awori added. “Having Kenya Judiciary Academy (KJA) as our partner is a profound indication of  the commitment of the Judiciary in ensuring access to justice for all, and further promote gender justice reform." The Crevit Mulier & Co.’s research report titled, “Community-Led & Trauma-Informed Judicial Sensitivity Training; A One-Way Ticket to Gender Justice Reform” will be available for public before the bureau begin the curriculum design and development of the project.  kvnrotich@gmail.com