Kenya is among African countries that will be participating in this years Africa50, the pan-African infrastructure investment platform, sharholder meeting in Marrakech, Morocco. The event, which will be from 19 to 20 July 2022, will be attended by African Ministers of Finance and other senior government officials representing Africa50’s shareholder countries, as well as heads of institutions, the diplomatic corps, and distinguished business leaders from Morocco, Africa and globally. “This General Shareholders Meeting comes at a crucial time,”, said Africa50 CEO Alain Ebobissé. "As the continent faces unprecedented external shocks and is recovering from the COVID-19 pandemic, we need strong, innovative and bold responses to accelerate the recovery while driving climate-resilient and sustainable growth. Infrastructure will play a key role in this. Africa50, with the support of its shareholders, is ready to scale up and speed up investments to accelerate the delivery of transformational projects in Africa.” Akinwumi Adesina, President of the African Development Bank and Chairman of the Africa50 Board of Directors will deliver a keynote address on the important role infrastructure investments play in enabling Africa’s resilient recovery and sustainable growth, at a critical time for the continent. He will also co-chair the statutory General Shareholders Meeting with Ms. Nadia Fettah, Minister of Economy and Finance of the Kingdom of Morocco. CEO Alain Ebobissé will provide updates on Africa50’s investment and fundraising activities, including an overview of the company’s growing investment pipeline and announce new shareholder countries.  “This General Shareholders Meeting comes at a crucial time,”said Africa50 CEO Alain Ebobissé.  "As the continent faces unprecedented external shocks and is recovering from the COVID-19 pandemic, we need strong, innovative and bold responses to accelerate the recovery while driving climate-resilient and sustainable growth. Infrastructure will play a key role in this. Africa50, with the support of its shareholders, is ready to scale up and speed up investments to accelerate the delivery of transformational projects in Africa.” kvnrotich@gmail.com