The Day of the African Child (DAC) is marked every year on June 16. It is a time for the world to reflect on the progress made toward children’s rights, as well as the barriers they continue to face. As we celebrate Day of the African today in line with this year’s theme of ‘Eliminating Harmful Practices Affecting Children’, it is important to focus on the vital efforts of communities, governments, and organisations working to advance the rights of children in the continent. Kenya has made significant progress in building a progressive framework for children’s rights. The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, to which Kenya is a signatory, outlines the rights and freedoms to which an African child is entitled to. Additionally, the Constitution’s Article 53 stipulates that a child’s best interests are paramount in every matter concerning the child. The article recognises children’s right to be protected from abuse, neglect, harmful cultural practices, all forms of violence, inhuman treatment, punishment, and hazardous or exploitative labour. It is critical to equip children with essential life skills that will help them navigate their life better. Life skills provide important tools for development such as self-awareness, independent thinking, effective communication and coping with stressful situations. Additionally, life skills help to prepare children to be better equipped to solve complex problems and make sound decisions in their daily lives. Children need an environment that fully supports their continued development to thrive. Despite its teething problems, the Competency-Based Curriculum (CBC) is a great example of focusing on a learner’s ability to develop skills and acknowledge as well as apply them to solve daily life challenges. According to the World Bank’s Kenya Economic Update, the ambitious reforms to improve the quality of education through CBC have made Kenya a top performer in the East and sted to the growth of the economy. While the government has made significant progress in policies protecting child rights and life skills programmes, there is still a need for other stakeholders to cooperate and ensure that we are creating a conducive environment for the children’s overall development. Protecting the African child is our collective responsibility. We all have a role to play. Parents, teachers and the community can make significant contributions in helping children develop to be better critical thinkers, protect them from harm in society, help them understand their rights and develop great interpersonal relationships. Additionally, corporations and organisations should provide mentorship, and training, initiate child protection laws in the workplace and develop programmes that create a conducive environment for children to thrive in society. One such organisation that has been at the forefront in supporting children and training on human rights and gender-based violence is James Finlay (Kenya) Limited. Since 2014, Finlays has rolled out several projects and initiatives in Kericho and Bomet that support child development programmes. Let’s all come together to protect our children.