Insurance Regulatory Authority CEO Godfrey Kiptum. FILE PHOTO | NMG The government is finally waking up to the dangers of allowing undercapitalised insurers to continue operating. The Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA) introduced higher capital requirements for underwriters in June 2020 in a shift to risk-based supervision. This required insurers to raise their capital to 200 percent coverage of the absolute minimum levels of Sh400 million for general business, Sh600 million (life covers) and Sh1 billion (composite business). But enforcement of the enhanced capital requirements was suspended firstly on fears that it will force the closure of many insurers not in a position to raise new funds from existing shareholders or new investors. Another reason for the regulatory pause was the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic, which understandably brought difficulty to the insurance and other sectors. But it is now clear that the quest for stronger underwriters cannot be postponed indefinitely. The recent collapse of Resolution Insurance and the widening under capitalisation of others is a reminder that weak firms will keep failing, causing major losses to policyholders and other stakeholders. Insurers have had ample time to do what it takes if they are serious to continue in this business. It is now prudent to enforce the risk-based capital requirements. This, of course, is expected to result in consolidation in the sector as weak firms merge and others are acquired by stronger institutions. The result is that we will end up with fewer institutions which will be better placed to serve their clients. Owners of the underwriters that are likely to be the casualties of the reforms may not like it but their interests should not predominate the greater good. We, therefore, expect Treasury Cabinet secretary Ukur Yatani to keep his word and give the IRA the latitude to crack down on the rogue underwriters. As he noticed, the prevalence of weak and failing underwriters is deepening the public’s distrust of the industry, which has the lowest uptake in the financial services category. Regulation of the sector should borrow a leaf from the banking industry, which has seen the closure of rogue institutions and the forced sale of those whose owners were unwilling to provide the requisite capital. As the country harbours ambitions to develop into a powerful financial hub, it follows that it must lead with better and consistent regulation.