Garissa Township MP Aden Duale. FILE PHOTO | NMG The State has slammed brakes on a Bill that sought to create a friendly and efficient Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) system. The 12th Parliament went on an indefinite recess (Sine Die) last evening pending the August 9 General Election. The Bill can only be reintroduced in the 13th Parliament. Leader of Majority Amos Kimunya, in a surprise move, withdrew the Bill that was meant to rebrand the KRA into a Kenya Revenue System (KRS). Mr Kimunya invoked Standing Order 140(1) and abruptly stopped debate on the Bill following fresh changes proposed by his predecessor Aden Duale, the Garissa Township MP. Mr Duale proposed changes that would have seen the Commissioner-General of the KRA recruited by the board through a competitive process and appointed by the President with the approval of the National Assembly. The law currently provides that the Commissioner-General of the KRA shall be appointed by the Cabinet Secretary in charge of the National Treasury upon the recommendation of the board on such terms and conditions as are specified in his instrument of appointment. Mr Duale also sought to have the Commission-General to hold the office for a period of four years and be eligible for re-appointment for one further term subject to satisfactory performance. “The Commissioner-General shall be appointed on such terms and conditions of service as the board may determine in the instrument of appointment, upon advice of the Salaries and Remuneration Commission (SRC),” Mr Duale said in the proposed changes before Mr Kimunya pulled out the Bill from consideration. Githii Mburu, the KRA Commissioner General was appointed on July 1, 2019, for a term of three years but the State extended his tenure on August 13, 2020, for a further five-year term. The House rules allow a sponsor of a Bill or motion to withdraw it at any given time. “Because this is such a fundamental alteration of the original Bill, I want to save this House time to debate the Bill by withdrawing it,” said Mr Kimunya. The Bill, which targeted 13 laws that relate to taxation, sought to rebrand the country’s tax collection agency from KRA to Kenya Revenue Services (KRS). emutai@ke.nationmedia.com