Journalists at a press conference in Nairobi. PHOTO | LUCY WANJIRU | NMG It is that season when entities with a political say are racing to be heard. The non-governmental organisations, the Church, media and other players with a stake in elections are creating a forum upon which to make their agenda count. The media are critical in disseminating information about electoral campaigns to enable the voters decide. Through their studio debates and town hall fora, they have positioned themselves as critical cogs in the election campaign space. Whereas media remain important players during and after elections, they need to be watchful of their messaging and subtle profiling of certain ethnic communities which can contribute to labelling and stereotyping. When institutions label people, those appellations stick and occasion their isolation. Within their programming, some media organisations have been purveyors of unscientific calls of certain agencies that claim some areas are violence hotspots. Without making careful evaluations and even deep research into what would make such places violence hotspots, they promote those sentiments as credible images of their true composition, thus ending up labelling them in negative terms. An example. Recently, the National Cohesion and Integration Commission (NCIC) identified certain places as violence hotspots. Other than questioning the methodology of arriving to such findings, it is healthy to question the capacity of the commission to undertake such a complex study. Therefore, as elections evolve so, too, do we need to transcend our penchant for relying on past trends to generalise how individuals are likely to react. While it is the duty of the media to report such findings, it is incumbent upon them to interrogate how such revelations are arrived at. What is lacking in their reporting. It is not the theme of this commentary to accuse the media in Kenya of fanning ethnic hatred. Far from it, although we have experienced episodes across the world in which media outlets have been used for such nefarious activities. When the media flashes reports without deep interrogation, it commits the error of perpetuating the same sin as the originating entity. Media practitioners boast a rich cultural stock by the fact that each one of them is a product of a certain cultural grouping. But some journalists in Kenya have proved to be ill-equipped for such tasks, perhaps as a result of their training. When a number of them file reports even from their own cultural settings, they have little knowledge of how to decipher the rich diversity of their own culture. They cannot help understand the way culture, for instance, can be used to enhance inter-cultural cohesion. But that is not the only limitation that can deprive our institutions of the opportunity to remain important sources of reliable data. The value of data, as shared, need to reflect the evolving nature of the settings in which they are derived. That removes biases and nuances that might inform their generation. As societies evolve, institutions must renew and re-innovate investigation to reach contextual findings. Societies are shaped by diverse elements: kin networks, informal institutions, socialisation, morals, ethics and systems of relatedness that come with interactions. The privileged position of the media to access and process data about our cultures, can be used to advance accurate information on people’s settings and behaviours.