Passengers disembark from the train that arrived from Nairobi at the Kisumu railway station, on December 17, 2021. PHOTO | AFP The Kenya Railways Corporation has released train fares for passengers along the Nairobi-Kisumu train service, allowing travellers to alight and board along the corridor. Under the new schedule, passengers will make stopovers at Kibera, Kikuyu, Naivasha, Nakuru, Njoro, Elburgon and Turi, Molo, Mau Summit, Londiani and Kedowa. They will also be able to board and alight at Kipkelion, Tunnel, Fort Ternan, Koru, Muhoroni, Chemelil, Kibigori, Miwani and Kibos. Passengers travelling on the economy class coaches will pay Sh50 from Nairobi to Kikuyu, Sh100 from Nairobi to Limuru and Sh200 from Nairobi to Naivasha and Sh300 from Nairobi to Nakuru. ALSO READ: KRC switches Kisumu, Nairobi train to night travel on low demand They will also pay on second class coaches Sh400 from Nairobi to Londiani, Sh500 from Nairobi to Kipkelion and Sh600 from the city to Kisumu. Passengers on the route will also pay for first-class seats Sh200 from Nairobi to Kikuyu, Sh300 from Nairobi to Limuru and Sh600 from Nairobi to Naivasha,” said the corporation on Monday. They will also pay first-class coaches Sh800 from Nairobi to Nakuru, Sh1300 from Nairobi to Londiani, Sh177 from Nairobi to Kipkelion and Sh2,000 from Nairobi to Kisumu. The passenger fares along termini on the Nairobi-Kisumu passenger train come barely a few days after the corporation shifted to ferrying passengers on the route at night on low demand during the day. The shift to night operations, the corporation said is mainly on passengers’ request, a majority who prefer to travel at night. The train service resumed night operations on the route starting June 10, 2022. ALSO READ: Kenya Railways gets Sh300m to complete Kisumu-Butere line On Sunday, it departs the new Kisumu station at 6:30 pm to arrive in Nairobi at 06:35 am. Passengers travelling on night Standard Gauge Rail service from Mombasa to Nairobi will connect to the Kisumu train in the capital. botieno@ke.nationmedia.com