Pump attendant fueling a vehicle at Shell Petroleum Station on Kenyatta Avenue in Nairobi on Wednesday, April 14, 2021. PHOTO | DENNIS ONSONGO | NMG The Energy and Petroleum Regulatory Authority (Epra) should review its formula for setting fuel prices and ensure its components reflect economic reality. Oil marketers have complained that they are obtaining dollars at significantly worse rates than the official figures used by the regulator to compute their margins and final pump prices. The firms say they are losing about two shillings for every dollar they buy to pay for imports. With petroleum products accounting for the country’s biggest import bill, such a discrepancy between actual foreign exchange transactions and the official figures amounts to major losses. It is only fair that Epra look into the matter and, if confirmed, update its formula to be fair to all stakeholders. The emergence of an apparent parallel forex market has been blamed on the shortage of dollars. The Central Bank of Kenya meanwhile maintains there is no shortage of hard currency, accusing businesses of exaggerating claims. Given that records of forex transactions are available, it is easy for Epra to look into the complaint by the oil marketers. If indeed they are obtaining dollars at rates worse than the official line, then the regulator must update its numbers. To ignore their plea will amount to rocking their profit margins and will be a mockery of the fuel price regulation system where everything is supposed to be transparent. The complaint by the oil marketers is particularly important given that they face other financial challenges whose impact is not captured by the formula. The biggest is the delay in receiving subsidies running into billions of shillings. The companies often go for months before getting the money which is used to tame the rise of prices of petroleum products. The delays mean that the companies face the burden of financing their inventory from elsewhere including banks that charge interest. These additional costs are not factored in the formula but they form real and substantial expenses. We urge government officials to be honest in their dealings with the public and businesses. That will include addressing major questions surrounding the official forex rates whose credibility has been attacked by various market players.