The Bomas of Kenya, which is the IEBC's national tallying centre. PHOTO | FRANCIS NDERITU | NMG The 2017 General Election proved expensive for businesses, which had to contend with riots that cost the economy billions of shillings before the ‘Handshake’ between President Uhuru Kenyatta and his opponent Raila Odinga calmed things down. This cyclical disruption of the economy has been the main worry for businesses over the past decade, forcing them to take up cover against associated losses, which lead to higher cost of doing business and discourages long term investment. It is, therefore, encouraging to hear from insurers that firms are more confident of smooth polls period this time round, which bodes well for the economy which is just recovering from the Covid-19 troubles. The benefits of this include continuity, which cushions jobs and income, leading to expansion and growth. The high-stakes election is, however, not without risk, the optimism by businesses notwithstanding. This lies largely in how the election is handled and its credibility thereafter. As we saw in 2007 and 2017, the lack of faith in the institutions and conduct of the elections can unravel peace with devastating effects. This, therefore, places huge onus on the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission to conduct an election that is above board, in particular putting into use the lessons learnt from the 2017 poll. The political class has also not always covered itself in glory with accusations of using inciting language to fan unrest to influence voting or when results don’t go their way. Contestants must, therefore, remain aware that peace and harmony supersede personal interests. At the same time, fulfilling the optimism being registered by businesses will depend a lot on the security organs and how they conduct themselves before and after the polls. To this category, one can add the National Cohesion and Integration Commission, which is tasked with enhancing tolerance, cohesion and coexistence across the different communities and regions that make up Kenya. These institutions must move with speed to nip in the bud any attempts to destabilise the country, and to do so, they must also be backed by a firm Judiciary which ought to show troublemakers that it has the bite to match its bark when punishing people.