The State fuel subsidy programme has cushioned Kenyans from escalating global oil prices, but our position is that it is not sustainable. While the government's effort has ensured cheaper energy than some neighbouring countries, policymakers have other tools that could keep the prices down. Already, fuel subsidy has been slashed by 84 percent or Sh26.7 billion for the financial year starting next month, pointing to costly petrol and a political headache for the next administration. Budget documents tabled in Parliament show a Sh5 billion allocation for the subsidy in the fiscal year starting July against the Sh31.7 billion used this year to stabilise prices at the pump and keep inflation within the Treasury's preferred rate. The reduced allocation sets the stage for costlier fuel in an environment where global crude oil prices are projected to close the year at $104 per barrel. The government could opt to reduce some taxes like the eight percent value-added tax or suspend them until such a time that the global petroleum products prices would have stabilised. President Uhuru Kenyatta, at the height of the Covid-19 pandemic, suspended and waived some taxes for businesses and individuals, which cushioned millions from the economic ravages of the disease. A more predictable and sustainable measure would ensure that oil marketers do not disrupt the distribution of the commodity like it happened in April. Oil majors have blamed the Treasury for delaying payments of the subsidy funds that led to weeklong supply disruptions in April. At the moment, the programme seems to be working, but there are risks of disruptions as we head toward the August elections and a regime change. The factors that have led to the current high fuel prices are also likely to drag into the next financial year, making it a matter of urgency to have a sustainable solution. The war in Ukraine has pushed countries in the West to shun Russian energy supplies. The conflict might take long as the war enters a new phase fuelling further the energy crisis.