Entrance of Miwani Sugar Factory in Kisumu County. PHOTO | TONNY OMONDI | NMG Agriculture Cabinet Secretary Peter Munya has said that the land on which the collapsed Miwani Sugar Company is located belongs to the government as private players feud over the farm. He said the government will not allow any parties to interfere with the ownership of land which has been at the centre of a dispute involving a private firm. Although the Environmental and Land Court ruled that the land belongs to the Crossley Holdings, CS Munya warned individuals against claiming the land. "The land hosting Miwani Sugar Company belongs to the government. Therefore nobody should claim ownership of the land," said Mr Munya. 'The residents of Miwani are legitimate owners of the land. The land has neither been sold nor purchased.' Mr Munya was speaking during a farmers’ field day at Kandege in Kisumu County on Tuesday. This comes as a relief to Miwani residents who have been holding several demonstrations against the alleged grabbing of the land. The 10,000 acres parcel of land has been at the centre of controversy for nearly three decades. The Miwani Sugar Factory which went into receivership in 2000, is located on 10,000 acres of land. The firm has been reduced to a shell of old rusty metals after years of neglect. Before the collapse, the miller was run by Kenya-born businessman Ketan Somaia. But Crossley Holdings has claimed the land belongs to the firm. "This should send a strong warning for individuals who rush to court to claim land ownership for Miwani," said CS Munya. According to Agriculture CS the national government has carried out maintenance of the machines at Miwani to restart operations at the sugar factory. "We have allocated enough funds to pay off the farmers and workers. Maintenance works at Miwani are already complete. Soon the sugar factory will roar back to life after being on receivership," he said. He said the revival of Miwani Sugar Company will give farmers the choice of delivering cane to the mill of their choice. “The sugarcane farming is viable. We want farmers to get value for their work. The revival of this factory will create healthy competition for farmers on whom to deliver their cane,” said CS Munya. eojina@ke.nationmedia.com