The latest adjustment of the debt ceiling to Sh10 trillion just over two years since it was raised to Sh9 trillion shows the urgency of coming up with a more sustainable debt policy. The first step is admitting that Kenya has a debt problem, which is fast approaching unsustainable levels if left unchecked. Constantly raising the debt ceiling to keep up with the growing appetite for funds to fill wider budget deficits is not the solution to this problem, especially when one considers that revenue is less elastic. The other option of pegging the borrowing cap to gross domestic product is also not the solution to the debt question, since it does not address the root issue of whether the country is borrowing sustainable. Indeed, one can argue that these debt capping metrics are just meant to show that the country is not living beyond its means, even when it is patently clear that this is the case. Instead, it is time that attention shifted to measures that can address the debt question more fundamentally —that is cutting the actual growth of borrowed funds and easing the pain of repayment for taxpayers. In the upcoming fiscal year that starts in just over two weeks, Kenya will spend Sh1.39 trillion on public debt service, equivalent to 65 percent of the total expected tax revenue of Sh2.14 trillion. Basically, out of every Sh100 collected in taxes, Sh65 will go towards the payment of debt principal and interest. Therefore, easing repayments is critical to free up revenue to fund the public purse, which will allow Kenya to undertake more development programmes without having to resort to debt. Married to this is the often-repeated call to the government to rein in recurrent spending. This calls for the continuation of the efforts to lengthen the country’s debt profile, by cutting the amount of short term debt on the Treasury’s books. The government must also not shy away from the recent shift to concessional debt from the likes of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, progressively replacing the expensive commercial debt that has raised the repayment stakes for Kenya.