The government’s efforts to lower the electricity prices will come as a huge relief for consumers. Undeniably, the cost of electricity in Kenya is prohibitively high and effecting a meaningful reduction is critical if the country is to have a competitive edge to attract foreign investment in the manufacturing sector. Likewise, lowering the steep power bills for consumers when the cost of living is driving thousands deeper into poverty is crucial. To achieve this, the State has opted to offer Kenya Power subsidies in the quest to lower bills and cushion consumers struggling with rising prices of essential items such as food and ease public anger over the high cost of living. During phase one of the tariff reduction plan in January, the utility got Sh9.05 billion to ease losses when bills dropped by 15 percent. This was hinged on the firm lowering system losses -- the share of electricity bought from generators such as KenGen that does not reach homes and businesses due to theft and leakages from an ageing network. Now, the Treasury is offering a Sh7.05 billion subsidy to cushion the monopoly‘s cash flows so that it can reduce consumer prices by a further 15 percent. This is after independent power producers resisted the push to cut their tariffs in the plan that was riding on a review of power purchase agreements signed over the years. While the State intervention can be argued to be needful to reduce the impact on the company, it should be at best a stop-gap measure. Will the State keep dishing out hard-earned taxpayers’ money each time? The utility is plagued with a dilapidated transmission network due to the long period of under-investment amid a growing consumer demand. What is taking too long to revamp the ageing infrastructure? Safaricom proposed installing smart meters to curb theft and leakages and fix network weaknesses. How far are these plans? If we can’t prioritise technological infrastructure upgrade, subsidies will only end up hurting the overburdened taxpayer.