The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) met on March 30 as has been customary every two months. My attention was drawn to the second last paragraph of its press release: “The Committee noted the elevated risks to the inflation outlook due to increased global commodity prices and supply chain disruptions, and concluded that there was scope for a tightening of the monetary policy in order to further anchor inflation expectations. In view of these developments, the MPC decided to raise the Central Bank Rate (CBR) from 7.00 percent to 7.50 percent.” I believe it will be largely ineffective at least in the case of our country. Theoretically, revisions of benchmark rates is an effective tool in managing inflation. However, this assumes that inflation is demand driven and in the simplest of inflationary terms “too much money chasing too few goods”. In the case of demand driven inflation, the upward revision of the benchmark interest rate will increase the cost of credit (lending rates) and ideally savings and deposit rates thus discouraging borrowing while encouraging households to save. The resulting decline in consumer spending reduces aggregate demand which in triggers a decline in prices and thus inflation. However, is this the cause of inflationary pressure we are currently experiencing? The simple answer is no. High inflation in the country is a direct result of a rise in the cost of imports also called imported inflation. Kenya is a net importer meaning that the value of our imports exceeds our exports and we therefore have a trade imbalance and a current account deficit. In addition, the country runs a financial account deficit meaning that its capital outflows from investments, equity (stock) and debt securities exceed inflows. Overall, the country has consistently reported a current account deficit which measured as a proportion of the value of the country’s total output or Gross Domestic Product (GDP) stood at -5.5 percent in 2021 and is forecasted at -5.9 percent in 2022. Data from the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics shows that the value of imports rose 30.7 percent in 2021 compared to the previous year while that of its exports rose 15.9 percent over the same period. In Q1 2022 (period ending 31st March 2022), the value of the country’s imports stood at Sh592bn compared to Sh240bn exports, equivalent to a trade imbalance of Sh352bn. This means that while the country’s exports have been growing, the value of its imports has been rising at a faster pace and this presents a huge problem of monetary policy makers as the scenario has an impact on both inflation, currency performance and by extension the country’s forex reserves. The country’s dependence on diaspora remittances as a source of foreign exchange income to shore up her reserves and support the local currency presents a huge risk in the long-term. Diaspora remittances stood at US$3.7bn in 2021, more than three times as much as the US$891m reported in 2011 thus underlying not only the importance but also the potential fragility of the country’s main source of foreign exchange. So what does the above mean? To begin with, it means that the upward revision of the CBR will be in vain at least in terms of relieving inflationary pressure. Kenyans will continue to grapple with high food, fuel, transport and other costs at least until issues relating to supply chain constraints are fixed. It also means that the upward revision of the CBR will most likely result in an increase in domestic debt interest rates. Another dynamic will determine whether banks will increase their interest rates particularly on credit; that is their credit pricing models some of which have received approval. In this case, the extent to which banks will adjust their interest rates remains unknown but is the most likely direction they will take. The bigger problem is the depreciation of the Kenya shilling and not until we reduce the trade and capital flow imbalance will we see some stabilisation in the local currency. Monetary and economic policy makers need to look at the bigger picture and treat the cause and not the symptoms which is high inflation. Imported inflation and a weaker currency cannot be treated through monetary policy and at least through revision of the CBR. In reality, not much can be done in the short-term to minimise the impact of imported inflation. In the long-run however, the country needs to put in more effort to reduce the country’s reliance on its main agricultural exports of horticulture, tea, coffee and horticulture as well tourism and diaspora remittances and instead focus on high value added exports and encourage capital inflows to bridge the trade and capital flow imbalance. Until then we will continue to revise the CBR and implement other monetary measures with little impact on the underlying issues facing the economy.