Milimani Law Courts in Nairobi where the Environment and Land Court is based. PHOTO | FILE A businessman has been accused of transferring a property in Lang’ata to a name he renounced years ago to the detriment of his former partner. Details of name change emerged during the hearing of a case in which Mwangi Maina Thegeya was accused of depriving his former partner Robert Nicholas Darby of a parcel of land worth Sh22 million at Dam estate in Lang’ata. The court heard that Mr Mwangi Maina Thegeya renounced his name in 1996 through a Kenya Gazette notice and adopted Hillary Maina Thegeya. But he later transferred the title deed to the land to his earlier name after a botched deal to construct apartments on the property. Mr Darby sued and after hearing the case, Justice Jacqueline Mogeni ordered the cancellation of the title deed and the property to revert to Ashbourne Properties Ltd, a company formed to develop the property. The Environment and Land court judge said any transfer required shareholders to give a written notice to the company, which Mr Thegeya failed to do. Mr Thegeya had maintained although he renounced his name ‘Maina Mwangi Thegeya’, it was never officially revoked and he uses both sets of names in his official documents. “We have already seen that the 1st defendant admitted that he did not notify the plaintiff of the transfer. The plaintiff also denied being notified of any intention by a member to transfer shares,” the judge said. Mr Darby told the court that they intended to develop apartments on a parcel of land in Dam Estate. He teamed up with brothers Evan Thegeya and Hillary Thegeya to form Ashbourne Properties Ltd (APL). The company had two shareholders in APL- Mr Darby and Fintel Ltd, each owning 50 percent shareholding. Fintel was owned by Evan and Hillary as the former held 51 shares while his brother owned 49 shares. As part of the deal, the land was transferred to APL and the brothers got 50 percent shareholding in the company. As the project was about to commence, the title deed got lost. Evan died in April 2011 before the project started and Mr Darby said Hillary initially agreed to proceed with the plans but later backed out. Following Evan’s death, Hillary allegedly tried to bring in his brother’s widow as a director, a move objected by Mr Darby. The partner went ahead and created additional directors and transferred the title deed to the name he had renounced. skiplagat@ke.nationmedia.com