Keroche managing director Tabitha Karanja. FILE PHOTO | NMG The story of Keroche Breweries and its chief executive Tabitha Karanja is akin to that of the ‘Parable of the Talents’. A master entrusted property to servants. One was Tabitha Mukami Muigai, listed as the second respondent in a 2013 property row, and the other was Jane Wambui Muigai, the petitioner. According to a March 14, 2013 court case, Joseph Muigai Karanja, now the chairman of the board of directors at Keroche Breweries, divided his wealth on or about 1996 equally between the two wives. Each invested her share in the manner she wished. Just like in the parable, one person was said to be a good steward of her master’s wealth, investing it in Keroche Breweries, a company that has grown into a multi-million shilling company. Years later, the second party, Jane Wambui Muigai, was seeking compensation for missed opportunities for the wealth generated by the master and the other person. But Judge Mumbi Ngugi dismissed the claim with respect to Keroche Breweries. The court was told that the second respondent, Tabitha, invested her share in a brewing company that she called Keroche Breweries Ltd with Mr Karanja not listed as a shareholder but the chairman of the Board. The 2013 court case sheds some light on the journey of Keroche and why Mrs Karanja is fighting so hard to save it. “She is a shareholder, director and chief executive officer of Keroche Industries Ltd which she states she built singlehandedly by investing her money into [sic] the business to which the petitioners did not contribute at all,” the court heard. The court ruled that there are no circumstances under which a private citizen in the position of the respondents can have an obligation to provide for another adult citizen who is not under a disability with the rights guaranteed under Article 43. "The assets of Keroche Breweries Ltd, a private limited liability company and thus a juristic person, belong to the company and this court cannot now be used to determine who owns what and how the company should be run," the court ruled. With the win, the second respondent Tabitha Mukami Muigai (popularly known as Tabitha Karanja) went on to build the largest privately-owned beer company in the country. Feisty, the beer heroine has weathered many a storm. The Keroche founder has mastered the art of survival even in extreme moments. She is now mired in a tax row with the Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA). Bravely, she came out to document the run-ins with KRA that led to the closure of the multi-billion beer industry putting more than 250 jobs on the line. From February 2022 to date, she revealed, the company remained closed, with nearly over two million litres of beer worth about Sh512 million in reservoir tanks. “This has drained all our resources and, unfortunately, if nothing is done in the next seven days, we will be forced to drain down all the beer and lay down over 250 direct employees and thousands within our nationwide distribution network,” said Mrs Karanja. She has fought similar battles in the past and won, but clearly, the enormity of the current predicament has taken a toll on her. She lamented that on December 7, 2021, the KRA closed the factory and further issued agency notices to 36 banks in Kenya, blocking the company’s financing. “This completely collapsed all our business operations since we could neither produce, sell nor access any financing from any of the banks to assist in settling the arrears,” she said. Citing the grounds for closure, she said it was due to outstanding tax arrears of Sh322 million that accrued from February 2021, with the company’s pleas and constant negotiations between the two parties failing to yield results. However, the taxman is asking for Sh22.7 billion. “The delay in remitting the tax arrears was explained to KRA as dwindling business fortunes, leading to poor cash flows,” she added. The remittance plan, according to Mrs Karanja, was 24 monthly installments based on the company’s financial projections that KRA rejected and insisted on six monthly installments. The company, she estimates, stands to lose close to Sh600 million if the issue was not resolved in seven days. She has called on the government to re-evaluate the post Covid-19 effects and the impact it had on different sectors of the economy and formulate policy measures that will rejuvenate the players and by extension the economy. “Without reinventing the wheel, the government can borrow a leaf from the West where businesses have been extended grants, tax breaks, moratoriums, and low-interest loans,” she pleaded. “The President (Uhuru Kenyatta) should intervene. I believe there is always room for negotiation but, unfortunately, KRA has shut all the doors for me,” added Mrs Karanja. She noted that the economic effects have severely affected most local enterprises since they have not been fully cushioned by the government policies. “We strongly believe our struggles mirror the sentiments and struggles of many other local businesses that are suffering in silence without an avenue or platform to air their grievances unlike multinationals cushioned by their parent companies/countries,” she said. Does she link her current tribulations to the decision to plunge into the shadowy arena of elective politics? “My politics has nothing to do with the business that I am running. The convergence point might be the sound business policies that I was to introduce if elected to the Senate. Then, if that is the linkage, well and good,” she said. Just like the favoured servant, Mrs Karanja hopes the tax problems will soon go away and the master shall declare: “Well done, good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things.” Machariamwangi2008@gmail.com