Practically every organisation in the world is facing significant strategic challenges, as they battle to deal with a changing business world and levels of uncertainty that have rarely been seen in the past few decades. It’s no different in East Africa, where businesses are grappling with the challenge of transforming their organisations to be resilient and positioned for growth, in a socio-economic climate that is taking a toll on the entire region. Needless to say, Covid-19 has been the trigger for much of the disruption – and that’s not always a negative thing. Where many organisations in the region were delaying their responses to new value drivers and imperatives before the pandemic, that is no longer an option. Suddenly, C-suites are finding themselves having to deal with dramatic changes in consumer behaviour, while finding new ways to define sustainability and long-term value. The stakes have never been higher. CEOs must seize this opportunity to transform and leap ahead, or risk being left behind. More than ever, they are going to have to close the gap between intention and execution – the notorious ‘say-do’ gap. HOW TO BUILD A LONG-TERM FUTURE IN EAST AFRICA: To put a company on the road to long-term growth for a broader set of stakeholders, boards and C-suites must realise their new growth strategy cannot be built on the same assumptions and principles as before. They must see their strategic agenda as a new platform from which to create and protect value. There are three steps in this process: CONQUERING THE ‘HOW’ OF TRANSFORMATION: Successful businesses start a transformation process by asking: Will my business still be relevant in 10 or 15 years’ time? With their purpose at the centre, we work with them to explore the future and their vision, working through future-back scenarios that will maintain relevance today - and 15 years from now. UNLOCKING THE THREE VALUE DRIVERS OF TRANSFORMATION: EY has long believed that the core of value creation lies in three key drivers: putting humans at the centre, which means building the business in a more customer-centric way, while creating more engaging experiences for employees; leveraging technology at speed to gain meaningful competitive advantage, as new technologies produce fundamentally different ways of working; and driving innovation at scale, with innovation integral to the way the company unlocks growth. BUILDING SUSTAINABLE FUTURE ENTERPRISES: To go beyond being market leaders to become market makers, companies need to build long-term value and sustainability. This means broadening their stakeholder set to include communities, regulators, governments and the environment at large. It means determining what ‘long term’ really means: the days of quarterly earnings and short-term focus are gone. To get onto this transformation journey, organisations should engage in meaningful conversations about sustainability and interconnectedness. What role should each organisation play in society? How do you realign your organisation to be long-term focused? How do we acknowledge key themes in our business world and our society, like diversity, inequality, and purpose? These are the types of questions C-suites are pondering. The fact is that purpose is at the very heart of long-term value creation in any business or industry. There is a growing body of evidence – including a recent Harvard Business Review-EY survey, The Business Case for Purpose (PDF), that becoming a purpose-led organisation helps attract and retain customers, and empowers employees to be more engaged and innovative. Furthermore, companies that score highly on Environmental, Social and Corporate Governance (ESG) metrics can lower their cost of capital, as well as encourage longer-term investment, as the market increasingly rewards companies that actively look to improve their ESG practices. To seize those competitive advantages, organisations will need a robust purpose-led strategy for sustainable growth. Laying the right foundations for that strategy to succeed will be crucial. That’s where it’s vital to work with a partner to really move the sustainability needle from talk to action. The future depends on it. Mwiti is Eastern Africa Markets Leader at EY.