Boda boda operators protest in Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG This week a horde of boda boda riders descended on a motorist who allegedly knocked down one of them. It was an unbefitting incident as this was supposed to be a week of celebration and fanfare in appreciation of women. We all agree that it was immeasurably wrong what those boda boda operators did to that poor woman and that they should be held individually accountable. I, however, sharply disagree that this is equal to a blanket condemnation of the boda boda industry. While we sympathise with her plight, we must not forget that the motorist knocked and injured someone. The problem with the President’s colonial style boda boda crackdown comes short of confirming a class war between the haves and have nots. The institution whose responsibility it is to manage traffic in Kenya has failed. And had Kenya instead built a metro or train system for mass transit the likelihood of such explosive traffic confrontations would be greatly reduced. The reality is that while this is not an isolated incident, one cannot make a blanket condemnation of the proverbial boychild that was left behind by a society that focused decades of its efforts on empowering the girlchild. The dignity of our boys should not be taken away in the name of this imperial onslaught. Asserting women’s rights does not equal taking those of men away. I stand with our boda boda boys unequivocally and insist that they be fairly treated. The fact is that the boda industry has kept thousands of disillusioned boys off the streets, off criminal gangs, off substance abuse and off the unemployment line. At least with a motorbike they can provide for their families. It is the President who failed to build an economy that offers high quality, blue-collar jobs to absorb these young men. It is him who failed to upskill these youth with 21st century competencies that would make them competitive in the global job market. It is prejudicial to criminalise an entire generation of youth after destroying their prospects in life. Boda boda boys are who have changed our punctured tyres in remote bushes at the peril to themselves. They rush to find fuel and spares when we stall on our roads in the middle of the night. They risk their lives and wellbeing daily, slaving for pennies to get us home to the comfort of our families and to work on time. They go over kerbs, ride at top speeds and manoeuvre traffic dangerously because the Kenyan masses riding their backs are the ones in a hurry. They do not offer helmets because the same Kenyan woman does not want her new hairdo ruined. They ride with impunity because they pay their bribes dutifully on our behalf to the police. They transport our food which we want hot at record speed. They carry huge loads of building materials, equipment and explosive cooking gas cylinders that we order on demand. They are the donkey's back on which our society runs. A duty they do without complaining. And now we want to turn on and humiliate them?