A woman walks past a litter-choked lane in Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG Nairobi Metropolitan Services (NMS) is on the spot for failing to address the garbage menace in the capital. Raising the alarm, Nairobi Central MCA Daniel Ngegi said Muthurwa and Marikiti Markets are the most affected areas despite playing a major role in the supply of the food consumed in the county. The two markets have become an eyesore as mounds of garbage remain uncollected, putting to risk the lives of traders and consumers, Mr Ngegi said. “The markets have been left stinking with food, clogged drainage and littered waste,” said Mr Ngegi. He pointed out that despite numerous complaints and several meetings with NMS, no action had been taken. NMS had started to build waste material recovery facilities near the two markets but the projects have since been abandoned. “Regrettably, garbage collectors have since destroyed the only road used by the excavators and left big pits that are risky to both the pedestrians, lorries, and matatus plying the city centre and terminating at Muthurwa stage,” said the first term MCA. “A case for instance was witnessed a couple of days ago where near-death scenarios were reported in relation to the risky site,” he added. Nairobi generates 3,000 metric tonnes of waste daily but NMS has only been able to collect a little over 2,000 metric tonnes. South B MCA Waithera Chege complained that efforts to ensure timely collection and disposal of garbage in Nairobi have always been thwarted by unnamed individuals who act as brokers. Consequently, she wanted NMS to come clean on whether there are specific trucks collecting garbage within Nairobi and the status of garbage collection in the city. “Even though the focus of the county is to provide professional and eco-friendly garbage removal and collection services garbage backlog has been an eyesore to Nairobi residents,” said Ms Chege. The MCAs now want the assembly’s Environment and Natural Resources Committee to inquire on when NMS will complete the material recovery facility, cover the pits and fix the road in the market and ensure effectiveness when it comes to garbage collection in the affected areas. This is in addition to policy measures that the county has put in place to ensure proper monitoring of the garbage collection in the county to enhance efficiency. comulo@ke.nationmedia.com