An individual can go for a career break by either taking sabbatical leave, resignation, job loss or more personal reasons like having children or caring for an ill family member. I took a break from my profession when it dawned on me that I wasn’t growing younger and I wanted to have more children. It was a decision that I kept procrastinating because of my highly demanding job but when my youngest turned 8, I decided it was time to act. Often, we opt for the three months maternity leave but medical conditions, like I was put on bed rest, may keep one away from work for a good chunk of the pregnancy period. Additionally, managing a career, a spouse, other children and a pregnancy all at once can be overwhelming. Hence, I decided to take a one-year pause to handle one thing at a time otherwise, my brain would have crashed. We women have come a long way since our grandmothers’ days. Though we’ve made big strides and repeatedly shattered glass ceilings in the corporate world, taking a career break remains stigmatised and many struggle to make a seamless, pleasant comeback. Here are some lessons that I learnt on my great return. KEEP FRIENDS CLOSE, CO-WORKERS CLOSER While you often need friends’ emotional support, your former colleagues are the biggest fans who can vouch for your capabilities. The years you spent building networks and making a name for yourself in the industry weren’t for nothing. Whether it’s a tip on a vacancy or an internal referral, your professional network can make a great difference in your transition back. So, if you haven't already, reconnect with your former co-workers and see where they lead you. NEVER STOP LEARNING It’s a dynamic world where the only constant item is change. Markets change, macroeconomics adjusts, modes of operation change and you are expected to catch up as soon you get back. With Covid, for instance, we saw several technological advances and modifications to certain aspects of work such as meetings. Good people skills will accelerate your bounce back. While you are away, polish your skills by taking certified courses online or simply looking out for the next big thing in your field. We are in the internet age, take advantage! BRING YOUR CAREGIVING SKILLS INTO CORPORATE The time you spent becoming an amazing caregiver produced incidental positive results that you might not always consider. These nurturing skills make you an asset at work. Not forgetting how you dealt with the different temperaments of your family which has helped you to become a more robust leader; ready to deal with diverse mindsets at work. These lessons will help you build a compelling response for interviewers when you are transitioning back to the workplace. OWN YOUR STORY The biggest challenge of career interludes comes when you are ready to resume work. You start sending applications, say a minimum of five a day and it is devastating when all you get is regrets. I did nearly 10 interviews which left me drained every time. Such incidents may bring you down until you doubt your decision to break. Remind yourself that you have excelled in a career before and you will do this again! FINAL WORD In a season where all I could handle was my husband, our two beautiful girls, and pregnancy, I would advise a woman thinking of a career pause to first establish a good support system; my husband scored a 10/10 here. Second, the bills never stop coming so; shore up your savings. Finally, guard your professional identity, ditch yoga pants for a suit, resuscitate your passions, underpin your strengths, and work on your weaknesses. Look out for new opportunities and fear not a fresh start. I believe in you. You’ve got this.