Alvaro Miguel Daza Herandez, a 32-year-old entrepreneur. PHOTO | POOL Every month, a metro-sexual, a middle-class or wealthy Kenyan man or woman will write down a monthly budget. On the list, is an item that was not there years ago. Grooming. This could be anything to do with the money they will spend on the nails, impeccable eyes and skin, hair which includes removal and tidying of the nether region, night and day creams and a massage. There was a time when grooming only involved spending on a haircut which was about Sh50 or Sh20 and hairdressing could go up to Sh5,000. But now spending has grown tremendously, a boon to the beauty industry. Alvaro Miguel Daza Herandez, 32, is an entrepreneur and an artist. He says he started taking grooming seriously about five years ago. “That’s when I learned how important it is to look good, now it makes me feel happier,” he says. He sets aside about Sh20,000 for buying grooming products and paying therapists to take care of his skin and hair. “I buy products that I use daily or weekly like skincare masks (which help hydrate skin, remove excess oils, and help improve the appearance of pores). I also make my nails every two weeks. Then I make my hair and go for massages,” he says in an interview with BDLife. Alvaro says despite being male, grooming plays a big part in how people see you and treat you in society. “It’s not a secret that when you are an entrepreneur everyone is looking at you, co-workers, clients, competitors… people are always looking at you. You have to make sure you are on point,” he says. To the millennials who have grown up fancying the lifestyles of celebrities who look very preened, looking extremely attractive and stylish has become as close to a basic necessity. This has seen entrepreneurs set up physical and online stores to sell from men moisturisers, pomades, body hair removal products to blemish concealers. The choosiness on what products people use and the specificity of the therapists that will touch someone’s body means that Kenyans are willing to pay more to get the best than opt for traditional grooming. “I spend more on hair products, it’s because most products I buy are vegan and vegetarian. They are not also tasted on an animal so they are a bit pricey, and they last longer. Most last up to three months,” Alvaro says giggling. “And a quick confession, I have 15 colognes.” The growth in the grooming industry is also being fuelled by younger consumers. Years ago, it would a CEO or top-level executive-kind of clique that would be spending on designer colognes, hairstyles and skincare. Sonal Maherali, a 42-year-old, is hard to miss in a crowd. In a room full of well-groomed, a common scene in Nairobi nowadays, she would the most subtly beautiful and stylish. It is her face that speaks volumes. Sonal is an entrepreneur and a luxury content creator and over the years, she has caught the eye of global brands. Now she is an influencer for some of the big international skincare brands. Sonal Maherali, a luxury content creator in Nairobi. PHOTO | POOL With a following of 145,000 followers, she talks of the importance of starting proper grooming at an early age. She started seriously taking care of her skin when she was in her 30s. As a woman in her early 40s now, skincare is key and she does it every day without fail. “Start grooming in your 20s,” she says. There are already many men and women in their 20s who are spending big on body care. Sonal’s must-haves include Estée Lauder’s Advanced Night Repair and Advanced Night Repair Eye Concentrate Matrix. “Estée Lauder night serum retails for about Sh25,000,” she says, signally the money the women use to buy the serum which can last one to two months depending on use. “To be honest, many skincare brands such as La Mer and Estée Lauder [both luxury] would look costly, but a bottle goes a long way,” she says, adding that good skin does not have to be achieved by use of only expensive designer products. “One can achieve great skin with also over-the-supermarket-shelf products such as sweet almond oil, organic jojoba oil and turn these into a serum and also add collagen drinks to their routine for good skin elasticity and anti-ageing,” she adds Why has it become crucial for Kenyans to spend and care about grooming? “I think grooming is important for every woman. Every woman wants to look nice and have great skin. It gives you the confidence to step out and feel and look beautiful,” Sonal says. Catherine Kariuki, commonly known as fashionable stepmum, loves looking good, going by the posts to her over 134,000 Instagram followers. “It’s important as a woman to look and feel good,” she says, adding that being an image consultant also encourages her to look the profession. Catherine Kariuki, the CEO of Image Redefined Kenya and owner of Fashionable Step Mum brand. PHOTO | POOL Catherine spends most of her grooming budget on nails and massages. “I am very consistent, I do it monthly on different days. I spend more money on massage because of my kind of work which requires standing for very long. I approximately spend from Sh10,000 to Sh20,000 monthly,” she says. In a country where many are still okay with a Sh200 haircut, it is not just Alvaro who spends a good amount of money on hair. Collins Dominic, an entrepreneur says he spends a lot on his hair and face because his hair makes him stand out. “I spend most on facials because I’m in the fashion industry. I own a men’s jewellery shop called Glass Box looking to transform the modern man. Every day, I meet these clients and I have to look spot on,” he says. He adds that grooming should not be underestimated because it has a value. “It is a boost of confidence and it usually defines my personality.” Collins Dominic, a 26-year-old entrepreneur and owner of men’s jewellery shop Glass Box in Nairobi. PHOTO | POOL On his hair alone, he says he spends Sh4,000, exclusive of the products. On his face, he spends Sh3,000, “because I do not use too many products.” The increase in the number of made-up men and women has translated into a booming beauty industry. Make-up artistry, nails, skincare, massages and hair, are now the investment hotspots. Some men hire make-up artists just before dinners or events. Then there are women who go to all lengths to get the best and latest skincare, hair removal or hair extension products, the price aside. Linton’s Beauty, a chain of stores in Nairobi, is among the beneficiaries of this growing grooming trend. “Kenyans have become more aware of what our skins need and that’s why most innovations in the beauty industry are offering more than one function unlike their predecessors, nowadays it’s not only about minimising wrinkles or anti-ageing. One major trend that has been on the rise is the use of pre and probiotic additions in skincare products intended to rebalance and strengthen our skin,” said Brian Osodo, the retail manager Lintons Beauty. Globally, the beauty industry has been on an upward trajectory despite the Covid-19 pandemic affecting other industries. “Millennials have also become a significant part of our clientele with their purchasing decisions influenced by media or online reviews. To capture their loyalty and trust we have positioned ourselves with brands that appeal to their market like Adopt’ (an Affordable French perfume maker)” he said. mesimiyu@ke.nationmedia.com