Vusi Thembekwayo, Africa's youngest global speaker, venture capitalist and business leader who will be speaking at this year's SMElink Conference. PHOTO | POOL Kenyan small and medium enterprises (SMEs) will be eyeing a piece of Sh100 million investment opportunities up for grabs at this year’s SMELink Conference. Dubbed Rhino’s Den, the pitching sessions will see small businesses with outstanding pitches receive funding. The three-day SME conference that will take place from 20th to 22nd April 2022 at the Movenpick Hotel, has been organised by the SMELink International in partnership with the SME Founders Association.  "The Conference is part of our strategic objectives to connect 50 million SMEs to Money, Markets and Mentors by 2027 to foster the creation of decent and sustainable jobs and reduction of poverty,” said SME Link International Executive Director PatricK Ojil. "The highlight of the conference will be pitching sessions for SMEs dubbed Rhino’s Den where Sh100 million will be up for grabs for solid pitches.” During the conference, SMEs will be connected to opportunities within the Africa Continental Free Trade Area as well as global markets, there will also be discussions on advocating for digitized trade and networking mechanisms and the inclusion of Youth and Women. Some notable key speakers who will grace the event include Safaricom #ticker:SCOM Chief Enterprise Business Officer Kris Senanu and Founding Principal of AC Advisory Director at the Graça Machel Andia Chakava. Others are the Nairobi Securities Exchange #ticker:NSE chief executive officer (CEO) Geofrey Odundo, Ministry of Industrialization Trade and Enterprise Development Chief Administrative Secretary (CAS) David Osiany as well as Micro and Small Business Authority Board Chairman James Mureu, among others. One of the notable speakers at the event will be Vusi Thembekwayo, who is Africa’s youngest global speaker, venture capitalist and business leader. Key topics to be addressed include trade linkages, markets, opportunities at the Africa Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) as well as global markets, trade requirements to foster friendly relations with regulators, funding, and business scaling among others.  Subsequent conferences will take place in Africa’s Key Markets to build an ecosystem of innovative and sustainable ventures; as well as the rest of the world that include United Arab Emirates, Asia, Europe and the United States of America. kvnrotich@gmail.com