President Uhuru Kenyatta, speaking at the event to mark Unep’s 50th anniversary at its headquarters in Gigiri last week, hailed the foresight of those who established the institution and challenged the youth to take the same approach and ensure that they too make decisions that will be celebrated fifty years later, long after they are gone. This is the only way, he argued, the youth would be able to help protect and sustain nature. The call for this approach to environmental conservation is attuned to the concept of intergenerational equity, a recognition that sustainability requires action based on a relay, where one generation takes action to protect the environment not just for the present realities but for posterity. This context explains the historic resolution arrived at Unep on plastic pollution. Just before the official celebrations of its 50th anniversary, the United Environmental Assembly (UNEA) adopted a resolution on “End Plastic Pollution: Towards an Internationally Legally Binding Instrument.” The recognition of the negative impact of plastics is international. Several countries have taken national action to address the plastic pollution menace. In 2017, Kenya joined the list of few countries that had taken decisive action and demonstrable leadership in dealing with the problem by banning single-use plastics in the country. However, as a recent media report demonstrated, that sustaining that action requires collaboration from the country’s neighbours. Despite the ban on the manufacture and use of single-use plastics in the country, investigative journalists were still able to purchase quantities of the product in the country. The director-general of the National Environment Management Authority (Nema) sought to explain the situation as being occasioned by smuggling from neighbouring countries. It is a demonstration that environmental challenges require commitment and cooperation by states and other stakeholders as no country can be able to deal with the issues on its own. This is the context against which work on a plastic convention has been proceeding. At UNEA 5 last week, the member states resolved to negotiate a legally binding plastic treaty. The treaty is to take a life-cycle approach while recognising that there is no one-size-fits-all method of tackling the issue of plastic pollution. It calls for concerted efforts and urgent negotiations over a two-year period for an instrument which contains both binding and voluntary approaches to addressing the menace. While the content will await the negotiations, the decision to adopt such a convention is historic. It will mark the first time in a decade that an international legally binding environment Convention is being adopted since the Minamata Convention on Mercury was adopted in 2013. It is a testimony to the continued relevance of global action to address the intractable environmental challenges facing the world. The resolution gives signposts on the anticipated contents of the Convention. It expects the promotion of sustainable production and consumption, aligning with the prerequisites of the sustainable development goals. The idea of promoting resource efficiency and circular economy is to ensure that we address the core of sustainability as regards the question of plastic use and pollution. It will anchor the debate on the most appropriate approach — is it a total ban, recycling some products or are there other alternatives? This must take place against the clarion call that accompanied the adoption of the resolution at the conference, which was turn off plastic altogether, which speaks to eradication as opposed to recycling. Achieving the intentions and contents of the resolution in a legally binding instrument will not be smooth sailing. It will require high-level diplomacy, skilful negotiations and collaborating amongst states and other stakeholders. As a country, we need to take a leadership role in the process, building on our national commitment to rid the country of all plastics.