Toyota Showroom along Uhuru Highway in Nairobi on September 15, 2019. NMG PHOTO Toyota Kenya Limited has changed its name to Cooperation for Africa and Overseas (CFAO) Motors Kenya Limited in a move aimed at enhancing multi-brand distribution of cars, motorbikes, and equipment. The rebranding will see CFAO Motors Kenya Limited, whose parent company is Toyota Tsusho Corporation (TTC), become the exclusive dealer of Toyota vehicles in addition to selling Suzuki, Yamaha, and Hino brands. The firm will, however, retain its Toyota brand which will be a trading name while shareholding and the team running the firm in Kenya will remain the same. The change of name takes effect immediately after the firm attained the required approval through a special resolution by shareholders and authorization by its board of directors. “Overall, this change allows us to enhance our value chain in the automotive sector over and above the Toyota brand, which remains the core of our business,’’ said Arvinder Reel, managing director CFAO Motors Kenya Limited Tuesday. Mr Arvinder added that CFAO Motors Kenya Limited will continue offering exclusively Toyota manufacturer’s warranty.  As part of its expansion strategy,  the firm will also offer quality used cars under the trade name of Automark as well as parts offered through Winparts. The company also proposes a range of short and long-term leases through its leasing partners including other services such as fleet management. “We believe this change in name puts us in a better position to offer diversified mobility solutions to all our customers and business partners. Our commitment to you remains, to become the place where customers love to visit, and people love to work.” In 2016, Toyota Tsusho Corporation (TTC) our parent company acquired the Corporation for Africa & Overseas (CFAO) (based in Paris, France) along with all its subsidiaries and networks across Africa. TTC went further to form an African Division with all operations in Africa reporting to CFAO Paris.  CFAO is a key player in the fields of mobility, healthcare, consumer goods, infrastructure, and energy in 39 countries on the African continent. CFAO which started operations in Africa in 1852 has a turnover revenue of €5.8 billion  (Sh728 billion) and specializes in healthcare, mobility, infrastructure, and consumer.