Justice Maureen Onyango during a past court session. PHOTO | DENNIS ONSONGO | NMG A judge has declined to compel the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) to approve new signatories to accounts of the Nairobi County Assembly Board, which City Hall has blamed for persistent salary delays. Justice Maureen Onyango of the Employment and Labour Relations court said the Nairobi City County Assembly Services Board was to blame for the delay as it has failed to take steps by complying with the standard operating procedures (SOPs) so that the changes could be effected. The judge said the board was required to compel former county assembly clerk Edward Gichana to surrender internet banking tokens or appear before CBK for the changes to be made. Justice Onyango said the board has not demonstrated that it could not trace and compel Mr Gichana to surrender the internet banking token and formally hand over as required in the SOPs. “It is paramount that the handing over is done to ensure that the previous mandate holders with credentials and access to the IB tokens do not have access to the accounts,” the judge said. Further, the judge said, as explained by CBK, a new token cannot be issued when the other one is still held by Mr Gichana. She said “this is particularly critical” because there is no substantive holder of the position of clerk and all the persons who have been authorised after Mr Gichana are temporary accounting officers. The board said the refusal to approve and effect the changes has hindered resumption of normal county assembly operations including payment of salaries, benefits, taxes and suppliers. City Hall further said the refusal was an abuse of discretion by CBK, unreasonable delay or failure to act in the discharge of its duty imposed under the Public Finance Management Act. CBK, however, said several matters are pending in court on the question of who is the accounting officer of the board and who should discharge the duties of the Clerk of the County Assembly. The regulator further said the board had failed to join Mr Gichana in the case or take any steps to compel him to produce the IB Token. The regulator argued that all County Assembly accounts held by CBK must be operated as provided in the Public Finance Management Act. skiplagat@ke.nationmedia.com