A boda boda operator carries a man taking a sick relative to Endebess District Hospital in Kwanza, Trans Nzoia County. FILE PHOTO | NMG Triggered by the despicable act of rogue boda boda riders who sexually harassed a female motorist in Nairobi, the government’s law enforcement agencies meted a nationwide crackdown on boda boda operators. There was palpable nationwide anger at the industry, awakened by long-standing disdain at some boda boda operators who consider themselves their own law. Of course, this is justifiable and understandable. However, there are flip-sides of the conundrum that need to be taken into account, even as steps are initiated to regulate the industry. Boda bodas emerged in East Africa as a convenient means of transportation. The phrase “boda boda” was coined at the Kenya - Uganda border, Busia, given the convenience that bicycle taxis provided in moving people and goods across the border. Eventually, the bicycle taxis metamorphosized into motorcycle taxis. This was largely influenced by the entry of affordable motorcycles from China and India. Currently, the boda boda industry is estimated to inject 1 billion shillings daily into the Kenyan economy. In healthcare, there is a push towards universal health coverage. A key tenet of this is health services accessibility. In health services accessibility, key considerations that are made include geographical access to healthcare that includes defining the means of accessing a health facility. The World Health Organization recommends that every citizen should be within a 30-minute access to a health facility; especially in the context of accessing emergency healthcare services. Over time, boda bodas have become a convenient means of transport, especially for persons residing in difficult terrains and those of lower socio-economic status. For example, there are a number of pregnant women who rely on boda bodas to access maternal and child health clinics and delivery facilities. Therefore, whereas the regulation of the industry is most welcome, a broader review of its implications needs to be considered. This will negate the institution of a punitive regulatory approach to the industry. It is encouraging that the National Police Service called - off the crackdown to allow for a multi-sectoral implementation of a regulatory framework.