As Kenyans continue to grapple with the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic, there has been a growing concern on the impact of the disease on pregnancy. Past studies have indicated that expectant mothers who get infected with the disease have a high risk of having stillbirths as well as an inflamedå placenta (placentitis). According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), a stillbirth refers to a baby born with no signs of life (dead in the womb) at, or after 28 weeks of pregnancy. This usually causes immense physical and psychological suffering among those affected. An inflamed placenta, on the other hand, interferes with the optimal development of a child in the womb, by hindering its effective nourishment. This is because the placenta provides a conducive channel through which key nutrients reach the child from the mother. In addition, an inflamed placenta can predispose the affected mother to a condition known as preeclampsia (a disorder affecting the mother that is characterised by high blood pressure, water retention and protein in the urine). This can also impact the growth of the foetus and lead to premature births that make affected children vulnerable to various health complications. Even though most pregnant women that get COVID-19 may not suffer from these conditions, health experts note that it is worth screening all infected expectant women to determine which ones are likely to be affected. This will help in the effective management of the risks so as to safeguard the health of the mother and the unborn child. Unfortunately, such assessments have been difficult for clinicians to conduct as available tests (indicating if Covid-19 has affected the placenta of infected women or not) can only be done after delivery. And this is usually too late for major preventative interventions to be put in place. But there seems to be light at the end of the tunnel on this matter. A new preliminary study published in the Placenta Journal shows that a blood test may identify the risk of inflamed placenta and stillbirth in pregnant individuals who have had Covid-19. To ascertain the possibility of this approach, the researchers of the study assessed stored blood samples of women who had tested positive for Covid-19 infection while pregnant, amidst the pandemic. Of the 18 samples selected, six were of women who had tested positive for inflamed placenta following tests done after delivery. The remaining 12 samples were of mothers that did not suffer from the condition despite getting the coronavirus disease. Thereafter, the researchers embarked on looking for a unique gene identifier or marker (RNA) of the Covid-19 virus in the blood samples from both groups. This was done through PCR-based tests usually performed on nasal swab samples that are used to identify people suffering from the Coronavirus disease. According to the results of the study, the unique identifier for Covid-19 (known as viremia) was found in some of the samples of pregnant women that had been infected with the Coronavirus disease. None was found in the blood samples of mothers that did not get Covid-19. As such, the researchers are hopeful that such blood tests can be developed and used to determine pregnant women with inflamed placentas or stillbirth risk caused by Covid-19 infection before they give birth. “Right now, we don’t know if there are inflamed placentas until after the fact. We’re laying the groundwork for further studies so that in the future, people who are diagnosed with Covid-19 during pregnancy may be able to get a test that will help identify pregnancies that may be at higher risk of stillbirth or foetal distress,” said Dr Leena Mithal, the first author of the study from the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. “Most pregnant patients with COVID-19 will go on to have normal pregnancies. Improved versions of this test and additional studies to validate the finding could help obstetricians develop plans for those who are at a high risk of placenta inflammation and stillbirth,” said Dr Elisheva Shanes, a co-investigator of the study and assistant professor of perinatal and autopsy pathology at the Feinberg School of Medicine. According to the researchers, inflamed placentas affects between 1% and 2% of pregnant people infected with COVID-19. And unlike many pregnancy complications, they note that the risk of the condition and stillbirth isn’t linked to the severity of the Coronavirus disease. “This makes predicting which placentas are at risk next to impossible, because an asymptomatic infection could just as easily have complications as a very sick person,” stated Dr Elisheva Shanes, a co-investigator of the study and assistant professor of perinatal and autopsy pathology at Feinberg, Investigators plan to conduct follow-up studies with larger pools of participants and hope other labs will build on the small body of literature to further validate the findings. “But the best way to protect both the parent and baby is to get vaccinated. In our observations, stillbirths have been more common in unvaccinated patients,” the authors said. sarahooko@gmail.com