Children are usually vulnerable to respiratory ailments or chest infections resulting from the flu and common cold among others. Chest infections often present with symptoms such as coughs, headaches, tiredness, fever, chest pains, aching muscles, shortness of breath or rapid heartbeat. When infected children are taken to hospital, it is common practice for doctors to prescribe antibiotics to help alleviate the symptoms and speed up the recovery process. Even though the treatment approach is widespread, health experts are casting doubt over its effectiveness and discouraging the blanket use of the drugs for tackling all chest infections. Based on the results of a large research trial, which was published in the Lancet Journal, the use of amoxicillin antibiotics for treating uncomplicated chest infections in children does not have much significance in relieving symptoms than the use of no medication. “Children given amoxycillin for chest infections where the doctor does not think the child has pneumonia do not recover much more quickly,” noted Paul Little, the lead author of the study and professor of primary care research at the University of Southampton in the United Kingdom (UK). “The use of these antibiotics in such cases is not likely to help and could be harmful.” According to the researchers, the use of antibiotics for treating ailments, particularly when they are ineffective – such as in the case of uncomplicated chest infections – will expose infected children to detrimental side effects of the drugs which include rashes, nausea, diarrhoea, stomach pain and allergic reactions. Worse still, they note that the over-prescription of these drugs, when they are not necessarily required, is a major contributor to the antibiotic resistance challenge which health sectors globally are currently grappling with. “Antibiotic resistance is one of the biggest threats to the health of the public, and in future could make much of what is currently routine medical practice very difficult or impossible,” warns the researchers. Indeed, studies in Kenya have revealed that because of antibiotic resistance, a myriad of infectious diseases such as pneumonia, tuberculosis, cholera and blood poisoning are increasingly becoming more difficult to manage, thus claiming lives of thousands of Kenyans. In addition, the World Health Organisation cautions that if the drug resistance challenge continues to escalate, due to the misuse of antibiotics, it will go a long way in watering down achievements brought about by modern medicine. This is because doctors usually rely on effective antibiotics to ward off infections during critical medical procedures like chemotherapy for cancer treatments, organ transplants among other life-saving surgeries. While past research has indicated that antibiotics are not effective for uncomplicated chest infections in adults, the same level of research has been lacking in children. Consequently, the new study sought to fill the knowledge gap. To achieve this goal, scientists (from the Universities of Southampton, Bristol, Oxford and Cardiff) conducted a research trial to test whether amoxicillin reduces the duration of moderately bad symptoms in children presenting with uncomplicated chest infections. The trial, which was funded by the UK’s National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), recruited 432 children aged six months to twelve years old. Doctors or nurses assessed their chest infection symptoms at the start of the study while parents, with help from their children where possible, completed a daily symptom diary. At the end of the study, only a small, non-significant, difference in the duration of symptoms was reported among children who had taken amoxicillin antibiotics and those that did not. The costs to parents, such as the time needed to be off work or the cost of over-the-counter remedies, was very similar in both groups. “Our results suggest that unless pneumonia is suspected, clinicians should provide ‘safety-netting’ advice such as explaining what illness course to expect and when it would be necessary to re-attend but not prescribe antibiotics for most children presenting with chest infections,” said Dr Alastair Hay, another author of the study from the University of Bristol’s Centre for Academic Primary Care. The researchers note that a majority of chest infections are often caused by viruses. It is therefore important for doctors to conduct testing and be sure of the diagnosis before prescribing antibiotics so as to avert their misuse. sarahooko@gmail.com