Quickmart store in Nakuru. FILE PHOTO | NMG QuickMart is set to take up the space vacated by Tuskys at T-Mall in Nairobi, bucking a trend in the country’s financially strained retail sector. The supermarket will start operations at the facility on Lang’ata Road next month, stepping up competition for customers with retailers such as Naivas and Carrefour. The retailer’s sales and marketing manager Betty Wamaitha said the store will offer bakery, butchery, fresh fruits and Vegetables, personal care among other products. “We are taking over the outlet in May from Tuskys Supermarket who exited it a few months ago,” said Ms Wamaitha. It will offer a wide range of consumer goods as well as textile and electronics.” The new outlet coming in less than a month since the retailer opened a new branch at Machakos Wote road, opposite Machakos Level 5 hospital will become QuickMart’s 51st branch countrywide. The branch is coming up at a time cash-strapped Tuskys – which had over 60 branches during its heydays, has shut several stores due to cash flow challenges. QuickMart has not been in a position to take up as many outlets left by Tuskys due to the ongoing rent disputes between the struggling retailer and its landlords. QuickMart gained a bigger financial muscle after Sokoni Retail Kenya acquired a controlling stake in the retailer and merged operations with its outfit Tumaini Self Service under the QuickMart brand. The QuickMart expansion comes at a time Tuskys Supermarkets faces a serious cash flow hitch that has sparked a dispute with suppliers due to debts. Tuskys, until recently Kenya’s top retailer now has less than 10 outlets operating amid stock-outs. The retail industry has in the past seen an entry of new international players like Carrefour. As a result, retailers like Naivas Supermarkets have sought additional capital to scale up operations in a highly competitive market. Naivas signed an agreement with French equity fund Amethis Fund to sell 30 percent stake to its expansion. botieno@ke.nationmedia.com