A scene in Pipeline Estate, Nairobi, where a building collapsed in June. PHOTO | ANTHONY OMUYA | NMG Certainly, Kenya’s construction industry contributes immensely to our economy and well-being through employment, provision of housing and infrastructure. Consequently, this industry attracts massive public and private investment, and has consistently grown, prevailing through even the Covid pandemic. Local economic outlook remains positive, projecting unflustered growth of this industry into the future. A closer look into this industry, however, reveals grim realities, attributed to notable increases in preventable defects and failures silhouetted against increased production costs. As such, questions on declining quality, safety and value of products delivered by the industry have continued to arise. For instance, research conducted by the National Construction Authority on the collapse of buildings shows that Kenya has recorded more than 50 building collapses since the year 2010. In the year 2021 alone, Kenya witnessed more than 10 building collapses in various parts of the country. In the last one month, we have registered a collapsed bridge and apartment. Through these unwarranted accidents, we have lost lives and resources. Experts in the sector see no closure to this rot, unless the challenges bedeviling the industry are faced and addressed. This call, therefore, goes out to our government, regulators and the built environment professionals; jointly charged to oversee the industry, to get to the bottom of the obstacles troubling this vital sector. Firstly, Kenya lacks a functional and modern building code, a critical policy tool meant to guide, regulate and control the planning, design and construction of buildings. Practitioners are supposed to rely on a defunct code enacted more than half a century ago in 1968. This Code cannot be counted upon to offer vital and relevant guidance in the construction industry of our time. Consequently, the capacity of the regulators and professionals to work, bite and be put to task in a rogue sector has been limited. Secondly, there is a dearth of competent professionals in our counties, national government, and key regulators in the building sector. Stakeholders have often decried the level of incapacity in these entities. Emanating from their powers to issue building approvals and ensure compliance, thereby also deriving their income, these entities are vested with enormous responsibilities to protect the welfare of the public by ensuring safety of buildings under their jurisdiction. Unfortunately, most lack competent professionals, standard procedures and quality management systems to guarantee safety. Thirdly, the ‘contractor’ question must be confronted. The National Construction Authority was formed to regulate, streamline and build capacity of contractors. However, the poor quality of built products exposes high incompetence in many contractors. The Authority must implement reliable mechanisms of assessing, penalising and reporting contractor performance. Finally, design and supervision professionals should serve the public with honesty and overcome greed, as guided by training, ethics and regulations.