Cooking oil. FILE PHOTO | NMG Global inflation has caused a surge in the price of basic commodities, to protect their populace. Indonesia, the world's largest palm oil producer, enforced a 20 percent retention of all planned oil exports to be sold domestically. The world market reacted by plugging the supply deficit with sunflower and soybean oils. Both of which were facing unique challenges: Soybean oil supplies affected by the two-year drought in Argentina and Brazil due to La Nina; sunflower oil supplies a slump after start of the Ukrainian crisis which shut down trade in the Black Sea which accounts for 76 percent of global sunflower oil exports. This disruption of alternative oil supplies has forced the world to refocus solely on palm oil of which Indonesia and Malaysia combined produce more than 90 percent of global supplies. But Malaysia posted weak production over the last six months, with December last year being one of the biggest month-on-month tumble in a year thanks to the heavy precipitation and flooding as well as labour shortages. Leaving the world dependent almost exclusively on Indonesian palm oil. The expected outcome of an incredible rise in the cost of crude palm oil (CPO); before Covid took a toll (around April 2020), CPO prices were around USD700/MT (metric tonne). This escalated to about USD1490/MT before the Ukraine-Russia war. But after the war started, the price of CPO escalated sharply, with the first week of March recording the highest jump, namely from USD1760/MT to USD1980/MT. Locally, despite the fact that Covid related factors had caused a jump in the price of a 20-litre jerrycan from Sh2,200 to Sh4,500 in under two years, after the invasion, the price shot up to Sh5,100 in under a week. This rise is set to have an upward ripple effect in the prices of basic commodities and food businesses. To cushion Kenyans from the full brunt of the price hike, sector players have taken a raft of urgent measures, including selling-at-cost. There is still much that can be done, for instance making electricity cheaper.