A file photo taken on November 18, 2014 shows chocolate Kinder Eggs in a supermarket in Hanover, central Germany. AFP PHOTO The Comesa Competition Commission has warned consumers against eating some Kinder Joy chocolates recalled on Tuesday by the Italian candy maker Ferrero from the European and United States markets.   The manufacturer has voluntarily recalled some of its products over increasing concerns that they might contain salmonella bacteria. The products recalled by the Italian-based firm include Kinder Happy Moments Milk Chocolate, Kinder Mix Chocolate Treats Basket, and Crispy Wafers Assortment. There have been no reported cases of salmonella infections in Comesa markets including Kenya. The affected products were manufactured at the company's plant in Belgium where the bacteria was first detected. “The Commission has also established that some Kinder chocolate products are imported and marketed in the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa,” said the commission. “In consideration of the risk, some of the Comesa member States such as Kenya, Egypt and Sudan have launched a probe into Kinder products in their respective markets.” The Commission said it is conducting further investigation to ascertain the extent of the supply of the recalled products in the Common Market with a view to asking the manufacturers to recall the affected products and issue a notice to the public.   “In view of the foregoing …the Commission would like to inform the general public to exercise caution and avoid the purchase or consumption of the above recalled products, and return them to the point of purchase for a full refund,” it said. “Consumers who may have consumed the affected products and provide evidence that as a result of this consumption, they have suffered injury, have a right to compensation in accordance with Article 36 of the Regulations.” Salmonella is a bacteria that causes fever, nausea, diarrhea, cramping and vomiting according to medical experts. The bacteria mostly live in animal and human intestines and are passed through fecal matter. Humans contract the infection by consuming contaminated food or water.  The European Food Safety Authority last week said that they have detected about 134 salmonella cases; especially among children and that the route infection was likely from the Kinder chocolates. The Kenya Bureau of Standards (Kebs) said it investigating the safety of the popular chocolate products. Kebs managing director Bernard Njiraini told the Business Daily that samples of the products by the Italian firm sold in the Kenyan market would be tested for safety before a decision is taken on them. Ferrero is one of the biggest chocolate and candy companies in the world. The corporation is based in Italy, and owns other popular products like Nutella, Ferrero Rocher, and Tic Tacs.