Over the last two decades, the world has changed drastically. Kenya has changed, Barbados has changed. Globalization on the back of the internet revolution in the 1990s brought markets closer together and opened up distant markets to disparate producers from across the globe. However, over the last two decades, the internet revolution shifted to mobile phones with their near ubiquity, and quite literally placed the power of globalisation at the fingertips of citizens everywhere. In 2000 mobile phone penetration—measured as mobile phone subscription as a percentage of population—was at 39, 10 and 0.4 percent in the United States, Barbados and Kenya, respectively. By 2020 the mobile phone penetration in all three countries was over 100 percent, with Kenya recording the highest at 114 percent. It is therefore fitting that the focus of my address today is Kenya’s digital transformation and how we can deepen our relationships in addressing the challenges facing our citizenry. However, I need to acknowledge that not all developments over the last 20 years are to be seen approvingly—I am sure some Barbadians will look back with nostalgia to when the Concorde made regular flights to Barbados, one of only four destinations in the world. Kenya has had remarkable success in its digital transformation as you have seen in the introductory video clip. Significantly, digital financial services have underpinned Kenya’s threefold increase in financial access to 83.7 percent of all adults in 2021, from 26.7 percent in 2006. The seed for this transformation was planted in 2007, with the roll out of mobile phone money transfer services. This was in response to a send money home need by Kenyans in urban areas to rural areas. From this basic financial platform that was powered by mobile phones, an elaborate financial services ecosystem has evolved today, extending beyond money transfer to among others credit, savings, insurance, capital markets and pension products. How did the incumbent banks respond to these developments? First, with some suspicion, but soon after they saw the possibility of cooperating with the telcos and begun working with them to develop new products and appropriate services. Consequently, the importance of bank-branch channels has reduced while digital channels (mobile phone and internet) have increased in dominance. Mobile phone and internet transactions account for 77.1 percent and 2.3 percent respectively, of the number of bank transactions, and 14.6 percent and 21.9 percent respectively, of the value of bank transactions. With a mobile phone penetration of 132 percent, a large swathe of Kenya’s populace now partakes of anytime anywhere financial services. Advances in technology and innovations have accelerated the pace and raised the potential for digitalisation. The COVID-19 pandemic also served to catalyse digitalisation not just in financial services but also in other spheres including health, education and entertainment. But much more needs to be done to fully benefit from the digital economy. Digitalisation is the next frontier for placing citizens at the heart of any nation’s development and more importantly raising their standards of living. It is with this in mind, that Kenya’s Digital Economy Blueprint was launched in May 2019. The vision of the blueprint is a digitally empowered citizenry, living in a digitally enabled society. We aspire for a Kenya where every citizen, enterprise and organization have digital access and the capability to participate and thrive in the digital economy. To maximize our benefits, we must build ecosystems that facilitate digital transactions nationally, regionally and globally. This is the thinking that informed Kenya’s Digital Economy Blueprint that outlines five pillars as the foundation for a thriving digital economy. The pillars are: Digital Government, Digital Business, Infrastructure, Innovation-Driven Entrepreneurship, and Digital Skills and Values. Against this backdrop, how do we build on the digitalization momentum and put our citizens back on the path to shared prosperity following the ravages of COVID-19 pandemic? Kenya’s digital transformation has taken over 15 years, but how can Barbados and indeed the Caribbean region leapfrog in a much shorter period? What do we learn from Kenya’s incremental change that would help accelerate Barbados’ digital transformation? I will highlight three broad themes from our journey that could hasten the pace for Barbados. First, we must put people at the centre of the financial system. For both the public and private sectors, the key question must be what are the needs of the people, particularly in the context of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and how will digitalization work for them? To align all stakeholders in Kenya, the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) recently launched the National Payments Strategy, 2022-2025. The Strategy seeks to realise a vision of “a secure, fast, efficient and collaborative payments system that supports financial inclusion and innovations that benefit Kenyans.” The vision will be anchored on core principles of trust, security, usefulness, choice and innovation. The Strategy was developed through a consultative process, identifying what the problems are and setting out a roadmap for public and private actors to develop appropriate solutions. An abridged version of Dr Njoroge’s address to the Barbados Chamber of Commerce and Industry Digital Conference on April 6