A view of Kamariny Stadium in Iten, Elgeyo-Marakwet County on July 18, 2020. FILE PHOTO | NMG A Kenyan has moved to court to stop an independent committee appointed by Sports Kenya to probe the procurement process and construction of Kamariny and six other stadia by the Jubilee administration. Mr John Ndegwa moved to court in a certificate of urgency saying the mandate of the committee is illegal because the term of some members of Sports Kenya expired in February, hence any exercise done by it is illegal. The Independent Committee of Experts will investigate the concept, design, procurement process, contracts, and financial flows of the stadia including Kamariny stadium in Elgeyo Marakwet county, Chuka Stadium (Tharaka Nithi County), Kinoru Stadium (Meru), and Marsabit Stadium. Other sports facilities to be investigated are Rirung’u stadium (Nyeri county), Kipchoge Stadium in Uasin Gishu county, and Wote stadium in Makueni county. Mr Ndegwa says the chairperson of the board of Sports Kenya Mr Charles Waithaka lacks authority and powers to establish such a committee after the expiry of his term and that of the director general Pius Metto. He said the committee has already commenced executing its mandate and almost finalising its report to the board. According to Mr Ndegwa, the three-year term of the board expired on February 6 and Sports CS Amina Mohammed has not appointed or reappointed the four board members representing independent sports organisations. “On 17th February 2022, the not fully constituted board of Sports Kenya held a meeting and purported to approve the formation of a so-called amorphous and unlawful committee called the Independent Committee of Experts to investigate seven stadia projects being developed by Sports Kenya,” he says in the petition. The 15 member committee has Steven Oundo as its chairman, Kimani Mbiu, Alex Nyaga, Diana Musyoka, Larica Onyango, Peter Wangai and Mwangi Muthee. Others are Stephen Koech, Jimson Manyura, Sarah Ayoo, Thomas Odhiambo, Jackline Cheruiyot, Jaxon Indakwa and Lorine Shitubi. Mr Ndegwa wants the court to issue an order stopping the board from implementing the recommendations to be made by the committee. “If the illegal committee is allowed to carry on with their mandate and their report and recommendations shared, the applicant together with the general public will suffer loss,” he said in an affidavit. Justice Jairus Ngaah certified the case as urgent and directed him to file the main case within seven days. The Judge, however, declined to stop the investigations but directed the case to be mentioned on May 18 for further orders.