Youths load waste into a county garbage truck from a Pollucare Cleaners tuk-tuk at Manyimbo in Tudor, Mombasa on May 21, 2021. PHOTO | KEVIN ODIT | NMG Mombasa like other major cities has had to battle the challenge of waste management, from having dumpsites at undesignated areas to uncollected garbage piled on road reserves. To most residents, the garbage is an eyesore that poses the risk of diseases such as malaria and cholera. But to Michael Kiwo, amid the problem, lies a business opportunity which he quickly took advantage of. He believed in the potential so much so that he quit his steady job in a freight and forwarding firm to pursue his business dream. “Growing up, I witnessed an increased number of health issues caused by poor garbage disposal in the region. This often got worse during the rainy season as garbage blocked the sewerage system exposing the residents to diseases,” says Mr Kiwo. In 2017, he founded Pollucare Cleaners, a start-up company that offers solid waste management services to residential and commercial clines. To get a leg in the industry, Mr Kiwo started small, using his Sh1,500 savings to buy dustbins. He also turned to his family for further financial support of Sh 15,000, enabling him to purchase his first handcart. The business incurred daily operation costs of Sh300. On a day to basis, the startup workers start work at six o’clock in the morning by collecting garbage in residential homes, schools, hotels and in small businesses in Liwatoni area, Mombasa, Nyali and Mtwapa. By around 3 o’clock the group, which started with only five clients clears with the collecting and embarks on sorting the garbage. Here the plastics, metals, and paper wastes are sorted before proceeding to offload the remaining garbage to a municipal truck which transports it to Mwakirunge dumpsite. “To reduce carbon footprint and pollution Pollucare cleaners’ only dumps 10 percent of the waste while other wastes such as paper waste, metal waste, cans and plastic will be forwarded to their respective recyclers,” Kiwo explains. Charges for the different clients differ in accordance to their preferences and the prices range from Sh500 to Sh20,000 per month. “We charge clients according to their preferences and this is based on their requests such as collection times, frequencies, number of liners and the quality of liners as some want branded liners” Kiwo explains. To ensure a clean, healthy environment, the start-up that has four youth employed on a full-time basis and two on part-time offers dustbins and liners to their clients. According to Mr Kiwo, the venture is also a form of empowerment to the employed youths as they not only manage to afford a decent lifestyle but also keep off from drugs. The firm that is currently offering services to over 150 clients, collecting over 20 tonnes of waste daily also offers other services that include pest control, and fumigation using high-quality detergents and pesticides that are eco-friendly. Cleaning services are also offered on request. To ensure that the startup is efficient and effective, Mr Kiwo has partnered with organisations like Youth Empowerment Programme Initiative, which offers business mentorship, and the County Government of Mombasa departments of environment and energy Mr Kiwo has also been aggressive at marketing, using all sorts of strategies, from going door-to-door, to using fliers and the social media platforms The start-up also runs a public awareness campaign on environmental conservation. In order to sustain the business, the startup ploughs back to the business any single profit made. Pollucare Cleaners has also won some awards, and this year emerged second at Optiven Go Green Awards Excellence in the waste management category. In future, the start-up aims at rehabilitating the illegal dumpsites into green spaces with beautiful trees and nature. Mr Kiwo also plans to partner with other established firms to develop useful products like building materials and charcoal that are manufactured using waste and consumed locally at an affordable price. Though a success today, the startup has had its fair share of challenges as despite the many efforts put forth by different organizations to conserve the environment there still exists a percentage of people who are carefree when it comes to environmental conservation hence reviving the illegal dumpsites. carolwab@gmail.com