City residents at Uhuru Park on February 21, 2021. PHOTO | DENNIS ONSONGO | NMG The Nairobi Metropolitan Service (NMS) will spend Sh1 billion on the upgrade of Uhuru Park and Central Park in Nairobi. The National Assembly’s Committee on Administration and National Security says the estimated project cost for the two parks is Sh1 billion. “NMS requested the National Treasury for consideration of the funds to undertake the projects which was granted but was to be accessed through the 2021/22 supplementary budget and not Article 223 of the Constitution,” Peter Mwathi, who chairs the committee said. He said NMS has not accessed the funds since approval has not been granted. The NMS expects to receive the money after Parliament approved the Supplementary Appropriations Bill, 2022 which sanctions the withdrawal of funds from the Consolidated Fund. The MPs passed the mini-budget and the Bill last week, paving the way for the withdrawal of Sh127 billion to finance government services until the end of June 2022. The committee said the NMS has done preliminary work at Uhuru and Central parks using its internal capacity as well as savings from other completed projects. The NMS has demolished the iconic Uhuru Park pavilion to pave the way for reconstruction while renovation works at Central Park are ongoing. President Uhuru Kenyatta last week made an impromptu visit to Uhuru Park to inspect the progress of the works that started in September 2021. The renovations are aimed at restoring green spaces in Nairobi County, as well as transforming them to international standards. The Sh1 billion allocation comes barely a month after Lands Cabinet Secretary Farida Karoney revealed that the two prime public properties are among 1,500 others without ownership documents. Uhuru Park covers 32 acres (12.8 hectares) while Central Park is about 20 acres. The two parks are close to the Central Business District and border Kenyatta Avenue, Nyerere Avenue and Uhuru Highway. emutai@ke.nationmedia.com