A Jambojet plane at the Kisumu International Airport. PHOTO | TONNY OMONDI | NMG Jambojet has increased the number of flights to Mombasa, Malindi, Eldoret, Kisumu, and Ukunda routes following high demand ahead of the Easter holiday.   The airline has increased frequencies on key routes since last week up to April 23 but says that airfare is unlikely to increase by a huge margin. The carrier has added four more flights to Malindi on Monday, Thursday, Saturday, and Sunday mainly in the morning and afternoon, which brings to 27 the total number of flights it operates on the route in a week. It has also added seven more flights to Mombasa in the morning and in the afternoon from its hub at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport in Nairobi, bringing to 53 the total number of flights it operates on the route. The carrier operates Monday to Sunday on the route. The carrier, a subsidiary of Kenya Airways said there has been an increase in bookings in the week leading to Easter prompting them to enhance the number of flights to offer passengers more options. “We are adding more flights on our routes to meet increasing demand, especially during the Easter holiday,” Jambojet managing director Karanja Ndegwa said.   To the North Rift town of Eldoret, the carrier has increased frequencies on Monday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday to operate 28 flights per week up from 24 mainly in the morning and in the afternoon. The carrier has also increased four more flights to the lakeside city of Kisumu on Monday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, bringing to 28 the total number of flights it operates on the route in a week. Kisumu is one of the most popular routes in the country after the coastal destinations. On the Ukunda route, the carrier has added four more flights on Monday, Thursday, Saturday, and Sunday which will now see it operate 18 flights in total in a week on the route in the morning and in the afternoon. The carrier’s website indicates the prices are yet go up significantly as early bookings are cheaper.