Allowing the interoperability of merchant payment platforms among local telecommunications companies is a good move that will help expand the use of the services and in turn deepen financial inclusion in Kenya. There has been much push and pull over the issue of interoperability over the years, with the elephant in the room being the vastly varying scales of investment in infrastructure and market development put in by different players in the industry. But what the user stands to gain far outweighs these concerns. The fact that it will level the playing field — albeit in small steps initially — is also laudable. By plugging into Safaricom’s #ticker:SCOM M-Pesa payment platform, the smaller telcos will have a chance at visibility in a market segment where they have virtually had no traction. Safaricom will also benefit by having new users using its platform to make payments. For merchants, the move widens the pool of users who can pay using the convenience of mobile money. An open playing field will also help the telco address the perception that it is riding on its dominant market share to suppress competition in the payments space. While the initial phase will only involve direct merchant payments — with paybill options to follow — the user will be the main beneficiary in the long run by getting more choices. Hopefully, there will be competition on pricing of these services in the future, which will benefit the customer. The opening up of the segment to interoperability must, however, be met with goodwill from those smaller telcos that are now able to benefit from the investment and market development that have been carried out by Safaricom. They must invest meaningfully in their payment platforms, aggressively bring on board new merchant partners and roll out innovative payment options that can compete favourably with those already in place. This way, the end user can truly benefit from the move to open up the segment to cross-telco transactions, which is the main idea behind the push for interoperability in any area of the industry.