Juvenile convicts at the national rehabilitation centre. PHOTO | JOSLINE ADIRU | NMG Children who are convicted of a criminal offence will not face capital punishment, life imprisonment or corporal punishment if MPs approve a new Bill into law. The Children Justice Bill, 2022 prohibits the imposition of certain forms of harsh punishment on children sentenced by a magistrate’s court. “No sentence of capital punishment, life imprisonment or corporal punishment may be imposed on a child,” the Bill states. It also seeks to prohibit the commencement of prosecution for an offence by a child who is below the age of 18 years. The law currently stops prosecution of a child under the age of 12 years. “No prosecution shall be commenced under this Act for an offence committed by a child who is below the age of eighteen years,” states a Bill sponsored by Mbita MP Millie Odhiambo. The Bill states that a child who commits an offence while under the age of 12 years shall be presumed not to have had the capacity to appreciate the difference between right and wrong unless the prosecution proves criminal capacity on the part of the child. The proposed law compels the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) to issue a certificate confirming intention to prosecute a child. “Where a certificate is not issued within 14 days after the preliminary inquiry, the DPP shall be deemed to have declined to prosecute,” the Bill states. The Bill stipulates that a child who has been sentenced to attend a residential facility may not be detained in a remand home or in police custody pending designation of a place where the sentence is to be served. The Bill, which amends the Children Act of 2001, allows the release of the child and the suspension of a sentence pending review or appeal of the sentence. “A Child Justice Court convicting a child of an offence for which a fine or imprisonment is prescribed as a penalty may impose symbolic restitution to a specified person, group of persons or institution,” the Bill, sponsored by Mbita MP Millie Odhiambo said. The Bill also allows the court to impose a penalty of payment of compensation not exceeding Sh10,000 to a specified person, group of persons or institution where a child or his or her family is able to afford. The Child Justice Court may also impose an obligation on the child to provide some service of benefit or to pay compensation to a community charity or welfare organisation identified by the child concerned or the court where identifiable person to whom the restitution or compensation could be made. The Bill establishes one-stop justice centres consisting of a children’s court, offices for use by enforcement agencies and Children officers and facilities for the temporary of children pending conclusion of the preliminary inquiry. emutai@ke.nationmedia.com