Workers lay fibre optic cable at Mtito Andei Town for Safaricom. PHOTO | PIUS MAUNDU The Treasury recently announced that it has allocated Sh15.6 billion towards digitalising Kenya’s economy. For telecommunications industry players, the move holds the promise of further expansion of the reach and depth of digital connectivity. It is a timely move that will see nearly half of these funds invested into extending and maintaining the National Optic Fiber Backbone and County Connectivity Project to reach more Kenyans. This means that, sub-counties and government offices outside the National Fiber Optic Backbone (Nofbi) will be linked to the nation’s internet infrastructure, including installation and commissioning of the line from Eldoret to Nadapal in Turkana as outlined by the Treasury CS Ukur Yatani during his budget speech. Nofbi will also enable the private sector to expand connectivity to more remote areas. In the modern economy, ICT remains a critical sector that presents a great opportunity to spur economic growth. Pundits are convinced that the potential could be higher than the currently estimated 2 million Kenyans conducting business on the Internet. The reality is that there is latent demand outside the four cities of Nairobi, Kisumu, Mombasa and Nakuru and that expanding digital access by investing in the broadband infrastructure emerges as a core cog in the wheel that will turn our ICT ecosystem. In its National Broadband Strategy, the government acknowledged the significant digital divide between rural and urban communities with some parts of the country being either unserved or underserved with ICT services. Mr Yatani’s move should speed up the process of closing this divide by achieving the ambitious target of adding 8,000 schools to the internet by end of 2022 and availing more than 500Mb/s capacity per county. To quickly achieve last-mile internet connectivity to schools that are further from the national fiber optic cable, the government should explore using the latest wireless solutions like those used by Huawei for their DigiSchool project with ICT Authority launched late last year. This way, the 18,000 government offices, 13,000 health facilities, 400 police stations, and 54 Huduma Centre could then have access to high-speed internet capacity. This progress will take us towards achieving the ambitious National Broadband Strategy for 2023, which envisions a Kenya where a user in the remotest part of the country can connect with others within and outside the country at the click of a button to communicate and transact over a fast, reliable, secure and affordable internet connection. The completion of the country’s nationwide terrestrial fiber connectivity will greatly raise Kenya’s status as a regional technology hub. Already, the country has gained the global attraction of major technology companies as a favourable location for their data centres. According to technology researcher ReportLinker, Kenya is one of Africa’s primary data center hubs and is considered the gateway to the East African region.