Sheffield Africa Limited, has expanded its portfolio to offer floor cleaning supplies with an eye on the shifting market trends and opportunities on smart technology. In a partnership with a Swiss brand, Taski, the company will offer floor cleaning solutions ranging from automated sweepers, scrubber driers, vacuum cleaners, carpet care, robotics, sprayers and steam cleaners. The rising demand for sophisticated and automated cleaning tools has been fueling the growth rate of the tools and supplies market.  The market growth is supported by smart features in product design and increasing need for efficient cleaning solutions.  “We have realized the importance of cleaning solutions in the industry and have now partnered with Taski to offer floor cleaning solutions,” said Mr Suresh Kanotra, the managing director of Sheffield Africa. ‘’Taski is the ultimate cleaning machines brand suitable for any industry including facility management, food service, corporates, healthcare and institutions and we appreciate their focus on development and innovation in offering cleaning and hygiene results.” The company founded in 2003 provides commercial kitchen, laundry, cold room and healthcare solutions in East Africa with a niche in stainless steel fabrication and customisation. It first introduced the commercial laundry solutions in 2018, a venture that has seen remarkable growth with over 60 laundromats in the country, installations in hospitals, institutions, hotels and a Laundromat Training Academy for business owners and investors where they are offered guidance on running a successful business. Taski brands- a member of an American firm, Diversey Holdings- come with the internet of things ability and has a Taski App where you can be guided with their simple machine selector, video learning section and products and innovations. “Our products are constructed with quality components and designed to last to ensure cleaning excellence. We are proud to be partnering with Sheffield as our main distributor in East Africa as their focus is on offering solutions in the market from understanding their clients’ requirements, offering demos and trainings from their expert engineers and most importantly offering on site and after-sales support, ” said Mr Robert Kabogo, Diversey sales director - East and Central Africa.