Maurice Ndung’u, 21 year old, displays the combined machine that threshes and grinds. PHOTO | POOL Maize, one of the world's most important crops, is extensively grown as a food crop. Its importance in food and livestock feed cannot be overemphasised. However, a problem comes during postharvest handling and especially during threshing. Maurice Ndung’u, a 21 year old resident of Nyeri County, is far too familiar with this problem. According to Ndung’u, threshing is a time-consuming undertaking especially when done traditionally by “beating” with sticks. “The undertaking also makes it hard for the many cobs generated to be collected and stored, rendering them an environmental hazard,” Mr Ndung’u, who holds a certificate in mechanical engineering, explains. These among other factors compelled Mt Ndung’u to invest Sh30,000 in fabricating a machine that would not only save his residents’ time to thresh, but also crush the cobsto make animal feeds. The machine has an input tray where one feeds the maize and the rotating shaft that threshes the maize and directs it into the maize outlet. The shaft then throws the cob into a tunnel which directs it to the grinder, converting the cob into powder. The machine which can either be operated with the use of an electric motor or a petrol engine has a one drive unit and operates in such a manner that the two components operate simultaneously. Mr Ndung’u considers incorporating a blower to clean the maize better. For the cob flour, he notes that the texture of the flour is determined by the sieve. In one hour the machine that retaild at Sh 80,000 can thresh half a tonne. The machine is portable, affordable and ensures that there is no contamination such as dirt and rocks in the harvested maize grain and cob, he says. Mr Ndung’u says that the cob flour translates to low-cost cattle feed ingredients that is suitable for all kinds of domestic animals and are far cheaper than other meals. “Fine maize cob powder can be used in feed mixes to try to deal with the high costs of animal feeds which are preventing the livestock sector from thriving.