Corporate income tax (CIT) due in 2022 and onwards could go up due to the newly introduced interest restriction provisions that took effect on January 1, 2022. These changes were introduced through the Finance Act 2021 that replaced the thin capitalisation rules. Unlike thin capitalisation rules, which applied to highly leveraged companies under the control of a foreign company, these new provisions apply to all companies. However, there is a reprieve for banks and financial institutions licensed under the Banking Act as well as small businesses under the Micro and Small Enterprises Act, who are exempt from these rules. Under these new rules, a borrower will be required to limit the gross interest paid or payable to both related persons and third parties to a maximum of 30 percent of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA) in any year. Further, any tax-exempt income is excluded from the EBITDA calculation. For example, if your company’s EBITDA at the end of the financial year December 31, 2022, is Sh1 million, the interest expense allowable for tax purposes will be limited to Sh300,000. If the company has a tax-exempt income of Sh100,000, the interest expense allowable for tax purposes would reduce to Sh270,000 (30 per cent of Sh900,000). In essence, any interest expense above 30 percent of EBITDA is now disallowable for tax purposes. Consequently, this interest restriction will have a direct impact on the CIT for many companies with existing loans that bear an interest charge, whether the loan has been disbursed by a commercial bank, related party or otherwise. This interest restriction, therefore, applies to both related party and third-party loans. Further, in calculating the interest to restrict, this will include the interest charged, loan origination costs and other payments economically equivalent to interest in any given year. This interest restriction creates an issue for companies that require heavy borrowing such as non-bank microfinance lenders, leasing companies, digital lenders, among others. Further, loss-making and companies with a low EBITDA could risk losing the tax deductibility of interest. Unfortunately, this restriction applies even where such a loan is wholly and exclusively used in the production of income. Therefore, companies with interest-bearing debt will need to assess the impact of this interest restriction on the overall company tax position. Post-2022, an additional CIT equal to 30 percent of the restricted interest will be due and payable to the Kenya Revenue Authority. In the long run, there is a need for the government to re-evaluate the impact of this interest restriction and especially so, on industries that require heavy borrowing. For Kenya to remain competitive as an investment destination, the government needs to adopt measures that would reverse the negative effects of the interest restriction. Disclaimer: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views or positions of PKF