It is your first day at your new employer, you are excited at the challenge after making it from long and gruelling interviews. You believe everyone will start liking you, sooner than later. Well, congratulations! you have commenced an arduous journey of proving your worth. These nuggets below will help you settle in fast and wade through the often-mucky waters of corporate life. Read on. You are joining a team of people just as intelligent as you are and many may just as well have more experience than you do, so it is important to listen, learn and adapt. I see candidates who were top performers in their previous role(s) dissipate into obscurity when they get into the rigour of actual work while others bloom and become superstars in their new jobs. The ability to adapt quickly to new environments gives an individual a better start. This malleability is becoming more important than fit in the current job market. A few years ago, Amir Goldberg, an associate professor at Stanford Business School and three co-authors, gathered data from a technology firm of more than 10 million internal emails sent between 2009 and 2014. They used linguistic analysis to monitor cultural fit over time among employees — language use is intrinsically related to how individuals fit in or fail to fit in, within social environments. Individuals were measured against those with whom they had the most frequent communication. While an employee’s cultural fit at the time of entry was loosely connected with outcomes — that is, those who fit well from the outset tended to perform well — a much more powerful predictor of success was an employee’s ability to recognise and internalise standards. “We find that what predicts who will stay, who will leave and who will be let go is not so much the initial level of cultural fit as much as their trajectory — the degree to which they adapt”. Goldberg says, “there are important differences between individuals in so far as they are capable of reading cultural code and shifting behaviours accordingly”. This is what is now referred to as ‘enculturability’. As organisations strive to become nimble and agile, employees too must have the ability to adapt to changing situations, be it with client requests or within the work ecosystem — people, processes, and places. You need to quickly learn the lay of the land, adapt to your leader’s style of work and understand the ‘way’ of your organisation. The average job tenure per employer has continued to decrease. The current average is about 4.2 years and decreasing. “So, what has that got to do with my career?” Employers want to give opportunities to loyal and trustworthy people, not just the top performers. The fall in job tenure averages means that employers are not too willing to invest in people if there is no clarity on the return on investment. If you want to have a glowing and growing career, you need to demonstrate value and commitment and establish trust early. Do you want to be trusted? In the book, The Trusted Advisor, David Maister and others, state- I paraphrase, trust is a product. It is a result, an equation. A result of your credibility, reliability and intimacy over your self-interest. Your credibility is about how well you will master your technical capabilities and execute with excellence. Reliability will be built around your consistency, and ability to adhere to timelines and keep your word. Intimacy is how well you connect with team members, leaders, and clients. Do you know their birthdays? Their interests? What do they do in their free time? Ensuring you reduce your self-interest — a trust antithesis, colleagues will not want to work with you if they view or perceive you as a selfish and self-serving individual. Watch out if you are the kind that will never put in extra time to finish a task, or always wants to do the easy stuff, the type that is always too busy to assist, quick to throw others ‘under the bus’. Many moving parts need to align to enable you to progress fast in your career. There are those you don’t have control over, such as macroeconomic shifts in your country that affect your employer or your department. Corporate dynamics could also affect your progress. “So, are you saying working hard is a waste of time?” Certainly not, you will need thick skin and a short memory. A thick skin when things go askew and a short memory to help you forget and move on quickly when things do not go your way. In the course of your career, you will have moments of walking around with a bruised amour propre. When this happens, heal fast and soldier on. I hope you will find value in these pointers, during your time at your current employer and in the future, should you decide to find a new employer. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of Zamara.