State House in Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG The huge allocations in the Treasury’s budget on non-essentials such as sprucing up State official residences in readiness for new occupants once again exposes the government as being out of touch with what matters most to the mwananchi. Spending Sh238 million on the refurbishment of State lodges and offices, spaces that are barely utilised and that already cost taxpayers millions of shillings in maintenance and staff salaries, speaks to how the government is paying lip service to the austerity measures. Treasury budget documents submitted to Parliament show that the taxpayer is expected to foot the bill for a fresh coat of paint on four State lodges yet these residences are rarely used by presidents. With the incoming president also expected to run his affairs from Nairobi, these residences will keep remaining vacant. If the government understood the needs of its citizens, expenditure on unused State-owned properties would have been channeled to social service facilities hospitals or schools, or critical sectors like agriculture. Kenya needs extension officers to train farmers on climate-smart agriculture, for example. It needs irrigation schemes because we are staring at a food crisis if farmers do not cut reliance on rain-fed agriculture. Already, the latest forecast of low rains signals depressed food production. When will the government realise that Kenya does not need all these State lodges and plush homes, offices for presidents, their deputies, and governors? For instance, at the Deputy President's office, Sh20 million has been set aside out of which Sh2.4 million will go to a new lick of paint to the Karen buildings while the balance of Sh18 million will be spent on the official office. The restoration of Mombasa State House will cost Sh42 million while Nakuru State House will use Sh35 million. The Treasury will also spend Sh27 million at Sagana State Lodge, Sh16 million at Eldoret, Sh14.9 million at Kisumu, and Sh15 million at Kakamega. This is a blatant waste of money for a country whose citizens are dying of hunger and struggling to access quality healthcare.