Kenya's Interior Secretary Fred Matiang'i. PHOTO | NMG The government has begun plans to find an alternative crossing along Outer Ring Road for Pipeline and Fedha residents after complaints of risking their lives using the newly-built road. Interior Cabinet secretary Fred Matiang’i announced that engineers from the Kenya Urban Roads Authority (Kura) and Kenya Railways Corporation had been tasked with coming up with a lasting solution to the problem. This comes after the residents asked President Uhuru Kenyatta to look into the matter during his visit to AIC Pipeline Church on Sunday. The residents wanted the President to allow for the opening of a U-turn on the road that had been closed because of increased rail operations. Dr Matiang’i said the two State agencies had been given two weeks to come up with an alternative, which could include a footbridge, to help save more lives from being lost. According to the latest report the National Transport and Safety Authority released last month, Outer Ring Road was ranked the most dangerous road in Nairobi, with 44 accident-caused deaths recorded in 2021 out of the 381 deaths in 2021. “We have talked to your leaders and we have come to an agreement with them that we give Kura and Kenya Railways engineers time to get a solution to the problem. The engineers are going to work on the design and when they are done, they will sit down with your leaders before we go ahead to implement the same,” said Dr Matiang’i. The residents have been forced to jump over guard rails and drainage trenches while crossing the road. Outer Ring also lacks proper signage for link roads and any wrong turn forces motorists to go a long distance before getting to a turning. For instance, if one is heading to Donholm, one has to drive past Taj Mall before getting another turn as there is neither a U-turn nor a link road in the entire stretch. Further, missing the link at Manyanja Road forces one to drive to Kangundo Road roundabout for a turn. “Let us be patient as the government looks at the problem. It is only yesterday (Sunday) that you told the President about the issue and we are already here to look into it. Let us give the engineers time to come up with a lasting solution taking into account the lives of residents,” said Dr Matiang’i who was with Trade counterpart Betty Maina and Kura director-general Silas Kinoti. comulo@ke.nationmedia.com