Passengers aboard Kenya Airways Embraer 170 from Nairobi alight from the plane in Kisumu Airport. PHOTO | TOM OTIENO | NMG The cost of air ticket to coastal Kenya has increased to Sh17,000 for a one-way ticket ahead of Easter as some flights are sold out, marking one of the steepest rises in the last three years. The sharp increase in charges, which will see passengers dig deeper into their pockets, has been occasioned by high demand for air travel as more people plan to go on vacation at Kenya’s favourite tourist destinations. Passengers travelling to Mombasa and Ukunda on Good Friday will part with Sh17,000 from as low as Sh5,800, which they would have paid this week on some of the flights to the coastal towns. Jambojet chief executive officer Karanja Ndegwa said there has been high demand for flying and that those who made early bookings enjoyed good fares. “We have 10 seats remaining, early bookings got good fare,” Mr Ndegwa said in an interview with the Business Daily. The move implies that passengers who want to make Easter bookings now will have to contend with high cost of tickets. Normally budget airlines charge low fares for customers who make early bookings as opposed to those who make their reservations at the last minute. Airlines such as Skyward Express have recorded full bookings on April 14 and 15. The sharp increase implies that Jambojet will most likely be the most popular carrier on the route this Easter as the price of ticket is normally determined by demand. Kenya Airways (pictured) will be charging Sh12,990 within the same dates for a one-way ticket to Mombasa this Easter from a low of Sh6,740 this Monday. High demand for Easter is also manifested through full bookings that have been recorded on some flights. For instance, the Jambojet morning flight to Malindi on April 14 is fully booked and so is the one to Ukunda on the same dates. Passengers travelling to Kisumu on Friday will part with Sh7,800 one way from a low of Sh5,800 if one was to travel today. Kisumu is normally one of the most popular routes in western Kenya and normally attracts huge traffic of travellers. Kenya Airways will charge Sh11,255 on economy class to Kisumu on Good Friday up from Sh6,855 that one would pay if they were traveling this week. gandae@ke.nationmedia.com