Interior Cabinet Secretary Fred Matiang’i. FILE PHOTO | NMG Kenyans will know the ownership status of 15,000-acre Agricultural Development Corporation (ADC) Laikipia Mutara Ranch that is associated with Deputy President William Ruto. Interior Cabinet Secretary Fred Matiang’i on Tuesday told Parliament that he would reveal the details as soon as the Lands Ministry furnishes his office with a report. Dr Matiang’i in last September kicked off a storm after tabling a document that provided a sneak-peek into Dr Ruto’s wealth. The tabling of the document followed the withdrawal of part of Dr Ruto’s 257-member security team that offers round-the-clock protection to his public and private assets. The document showed Dr Ruto had an interest in over 18,500 acres of real estate properties, two high-end hotels, five helicopters and a chicken farm. The document revealed that the Dr Ruto owned Murumbi farm in Transmara Narok, Agricultural Development Corporation- ADC Laikipia Mutara Ranch, Mata farm in Taita Taveta, Koitalel Poultry farm, private homes in Elgon View and Kosachei in Eldoret, Dolphine, and Weston hotels. He also owns Kitengela Gas and two hangers at Wilson Airport under Kwae Island Development. Dr Ruto has since disowned ownership of part of the multibillion-shilling properties including the ADC Laikipia Mutara Ranch. On Tuesday, Dr Matiang’i asked MPs to accord him two weeks to seek a response on the ownership of the ADC Laikipia Mutara Ranch from the Lands ministry. He undertook to write a reminder to Lands Principal Secretary Nicholas Muraguri and convene an inter-ministerial meeting to fast track a response on the ownership of the Laikipia ranch. Nominated MP David Sankok had asked Dr Matiang’i to provide details of the 15,000 acres, Land Reference number, size, any excision and record of previous owners. “I appeared before this House to answer questions on deployment of security to the DP and his properties. “He could be there (Laikipia ADC Mutara Ranch) to visit friends. I don’t want to engage in a political issue. I will table information on this issue,” Dr Matiang’i said. emutai@ke.nationmedia.com