Director-General for Health Dr Patrick Amoth at a past media briefing. FILE PHOTO | NMG Stakeholders from different sectors have validated the Food Safety Bill 2021 that is aimed at safeguarding consumers' health and increasing Kenya’s produce access to the world market. The food safety bill, if passed, will create the Office of Food and Feed Safety Control, which will ensure compliance with international standards. The Bill aligns with the tenets of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and the Codex- the internationally recognised food production and food safety standards established by the Food and Agriculture Organisation and World Health Organisation. The chairperson of the Inter-ministerial Taskforce Patrick Amoth said inadequate food safety is a significant contributor to the burden of disease in developing countries including Kenya and should be addressed as the food system develops. “The heavy burden of foodborne diseases imposes substantial economic losses to the individual, households, health systems and entire nations. Economic losses as a result of rejected food exports due to shortcomings in food safety are also often very significant,” said Dr Amoth. In Kenya, the nationwide food quality and safety systems are legally controlled by various government agencies under different ministries using separate laws. Food safety regulation agencies work under the ministries responsible for trade, industrialisation, health, livestock, fisheries and agriculture. However, the new body to be created by this Bill will rest these functions to a single body, avoiding duplication of roles. After validation, the Bill will now be moved to the Cabinet through the office of the Attorney General before it is tabled to parliament for a debate. Speaking during the validation conference on Thursday, former Principal Secretary in the Ministry of Agriculture Hamadi Boga said the Bill, if implemented, will ensure consumers get access to safe food and that international trade will not be hindered on account of the high level of chemicals on the produce. gandae@ke.nationmedia.com