The busy Namanga border town between Kenya and Tanzania. FILE PHOTO | NMG I decided to take an easy drive to Namanga recently. It’s lots of fun. Beyond Isinya, the highway is wide, reasonably free and surrounded by vast land. The landscape is great. Before long, the skyline is interrupted by the imposing Umma University block, a few kilometres from Kajiado town, the county headquarters. After Kajiado, the traffic reduces. Trucks moving goods to and from Arusha and Namanga dominate. Clearly, the roadside markets of yesteryears have been growing, and some are now busy trading centres. Bisil, however, stands out. The place has grown and is visibly vibrant. Beyond Bisil stands the much smaller and quieter Ngatataek. This centre, which sits about 20km from Namanga, is set to greatly benefit from the town’s imminent growth. A relaxed drive through the 160km from Nairobi to Namanga via Kitengela takes about two and half hours. Some fast drivers can do it in a shorter time. Those afraid to plough the Mombasa Road and Kitengela traffic jams may use the freer Nairobi-Ngong-Kiserian-Isinya rim. It allows one to appreciate the emerging peri-urban developments. Evidently, the modernisation of the road to Arusha through Namanga has greatly eased business connectivity between Nairobi and Namanga, and between Kenya and Tanzania. It’s giving good value for money. Namanga, a multicultural transit town that sits on the Kenya-Tanzania border, has really grown. Recent developments, particularly the reconstruction of the road, and the building of the One-Stop-Border-Post have turned around fortunes for Namanga. The town now comfortably accommodates bigger numbers of transit traffic. Its population, and hence commerce, has grown. The presence of major banks such as Equity #ticker:EQTY and KCB #ticker:KCB is good evidence. Namanga also provides an entry point to tourist traffic from northern Tanzania headed for Amboseli National Park. Residents, visiting and transit travellers are driving demand for commensurate outlets in the hospitality industry. The staff serving the border post, the security formation, banks and schools are driving a demand in real estate which may mature quite fast. Likely, we shall soon see some small gated communities emerge between Namanga and Ngatataek. The mundane land values may tempt officers and business people to purchase land and establish homes along this corridor. This will spike demand for education facilities, particularly at the early childhood and primary school levels. Some entrepreneurs will also spot and explore the opportunity for warehouses to ease the storage of some goods and produce destined for the local market. So, this once sleepy town is slowly transforming into a strategic investment hub. And it also provides Nairobi folks with an opportunity for therapeutic road drives. It is uplifting to give your two hours to this drive rather than surf the “punishing” social media, or do neighbourhood banter. And with some little extra time, one can drive on to Arusha, just about 110km ahead. And be back to Nairobi for dinner or a sleepover at Namanga for a change.