A rally driver plunges into a pool of water at the Siyiabei bridge on Monday, December 10, 2018. PHOTO | GEORGE SAYAGIE | NMG It is difficult to find the right words to describe the East Africa Safari Classic Rally experience, now set for mid-February, just a week away. The Classic’s 10th edition is particularly special to rally enthusiasts who have eagerly awaited the biannual event for close to three years. Organisers were forced to postpone the Classic from last November due to the Covid-19 pandemic. With airlines grounded, competitors from outside Kenya could not travel and the stringent Covid protocols would not have allowed Kenyans to gather and enjoy the event, as they would have wanted to. For almost two years, Kenyans have gone through a rough patch, forced to weather the storm occasioned by Covid-19. One of the industries hardest hit was the tourism industry, a long-standing key foreign exchange earner for Kenya and a major employer, whose impact touches virtually every sector of the economy. As the fortunes of tourism dwindled, other sectors also felt the heat. Even farmers, for instance, had a significantly reduced market when hotels and restaurants were closed. While the East Africa Safari Classic Rally alone is not a magic bullet and cannot be expected to revive all hotels and travel providers single-handedly, it sends a powerful message to our primary tourism markets as well to the Kenyan people that the dark clouds have cleared. A growing number of people have received at least one dose of the available vaccines and most of the protocols have been eased with Covid numbers under control. People can now get out of their homes and towns without letting their guards down, and enjoy the food, the culture, the people, the beaches, the wildlife, and all other tourism offerings, from the pristine coastline to the forests and ‘crying stones’ of western Kenya. The Classic course is designed to run through 11 Kenyan counties, all known for their tough terrain, rich wildlife, and globally famous cultures. As cameras will be rolling, beaming the breathtaking scenes to television screens around the world, Kenyans in their numbers will be out there cheering and celebrating the return of the Classic Rally. It will be one of those unforgettable moments, which leaves everyone with a lump in their throat, and compels one to leave their comfort zone and go where the action is. Additionally, the Classic focuses the spotlight on the loss of species, the creeping deserts, the disappearing cultures, and the phenomenon of climate change. These challenges, will not just hurt tourism, they will also define our survival as a species. To survive, we must learn to coexist with nature in a delicate balance that allows businesses, people, and the environment to thrive. No business can survive in a community where people are weak from disease and malnutrition and it is unlikely that humans will survive in the modern economy without thriving businesses. The only constant here is the environment, which does not need any of us to be at its best. Similarly, when the county and national governments earn revenue from the proceeds of tourism, it gives them a reason to protect and invest in it. February 10-18. Eleven counties. Global viewership. Local and foreign fans. The East Africa Safari Classic Rally — the world’s first carbon-neutral classic motorsport event. The rally is a classic demonstration that we do not have to destroy the environment to benefit from it. There are people, local and foreign, who will pay top dollar just to experience what we have here and are privileged to enjoy on a daily basis. What is essential is an arrangement that allows shared prosperity. When the local community enjoys the rewards of their rich heritage, they will be sufficiently discouraged from harming it.