Bob's Closet entitled 'Home is where your clothes are' at Tira Studio. PHOTO | MARGARETTA WA GACHERU | NMG All my Venus Days’ is an intimate look at the way one artist has processed her grief after losing the love of her life to leukaemia. “It’s not over. I haven’t stopped grieving for him,” said Wambui Collymore during an interview with BDLife, reflecting on the installation art room that she created especially to remember her late husband. “But at least it’s a beginning,” she adds, referring to the third-floor former furniture-making hall that she has transformed into an artistic statement about an ineffable feeling, the loss of a loved one. The public knew the late Bob Collymore as the dynamic former CEO of Safaricom and founder of everything from the Safaricom Youth Orchestra and Nairobi Jazz Festival to the Michael Joseph Centre. But those achievements are not the material Wambui is concerned with within ‘Venus Days’. The country may have lost a great leader but she conveys the challenges she has faced in dealing emotionally with the absence of a man whose presence in her life had been both formidable and fulfilling. One can feel from Wambui’s three-dimensional multimedia installation that theirs was truly a beautiful love story. The large installation has a series of several mini-installations, each of which reveals a different facet of theirs together. One corner contains several rows of test-tube-like containers, each of which is transparent, exposing small seemingly insignificant items, a pair of tweezers, a ballpoint refill, a whiff of his favourite men’s cologne. Bob's Closet entitled 'Home is where your clothes are' at Tira Studio. PHOTO | MARGARETTA WA GACHERU | NMG Yet for Wambui, these little things are the memorabilia that can trigger a flood of feelings despite looking to an outsider like ordinary things. Gossamer white curtains hang all around the hall, each providing a veil that obscures the images of whatever hangs behind them. Wambui tells BDLife the curtains are meant to represent the way she still looks at life without him, through a clouded lens. Upon entering the large hall, on the left-hand side, the curtains partially cloud the view of photographs Wambui took of Bob’s closet shortly after he passed. “I knew his things would soon be boxed up and stored. But I wanted to take images of the way he last saw his clothes,” she says referring to the well-ordered system in which he had left his shirts, sweaters, socks, and ties. On the other side of the entryway is a rack of seven snow-white business shirts, each of which had been carefully embroidered by Wambui with seven poems dedicated especially to him. Wambui Collymore used gossamer curtains as symbols of grief, at Tira Studio. PHOTO | MARGARETTA WA GACHERU | NMG “The first art of mine that I shared with him was my poetry, which he liked a lot,” says Wambui, as she reminded me that Bob himself had been an artist who had renewed his interest in painting. There were other photos that she had taken that hung from the far wall. These were snapped from his hospital room in London where she stayed by his side. These reflect on the concept of time and implicitly, on mortality. One series projected as a looped slide show is literally of clocks. Another includes images of all the seasons the two of them watched as they patiently waited to learn the outcomes of his chemotherapy and the other procedures that were tried, all to heal Bob’s condition. The last one seemed to work, “which is why we returned to Kenya and Bob went straight back to work at Safaricom.” But the condition re-emerged and soon thereafter, he passed on. The blood cells were the problem, which is one reason Wambui created a series of collages using his drug prescription forms to create cell-like spheres in ink next to musical notes from scores that Bob used to play on his saxophone. “In time, the prescriptions will fade, but the notes and the cells won’t,” she says, noting it’s a metaphor for how his best memories will endure, not those associated with the pain. Wambui admits she has been asked why she chose to share her grief so publicly. Her reply is simple. She is an artist, and the way artists communicate is by expressing themselves artistically. Her medium of expression is an art installation. Plus she is a historian with a Master’s degree from Cambridge where she learned the importance of documenting everything for posterity’s sake. And that is what she has done with ‘Venus Days’ at Tira Studio.