Azawi with Sobhuzac in Lovers Lava at Kenya Cultural Centre on February 13, 2022. PHOTO | MARGARETTA WA GACHERU | NMG Erupting volcanos can release an uncontrollable outpouring of red-hot molten lava anywhere in the world. The lava itself is so powerful it can transform whole landscapes, create new islands of activity, and also be terribly destructive and threatening. When Wreiner Mandu entitled his play ‘Lovers Lava’, he might have been alluding to the sort of explosive relationships that populate the play he directed and produced with Igiza Players this past weekend at Kenya Cultural Centre. At the centre of those relationships is the play’s chief volcanic force, Nawalovu (played with ferocity by Suzanne Karani). She’s the founder-CEO of her own media company. The company is apparently so successful (or she so financially well-to-do) that she can hire the three jobless characters who occupy her house, namely her lackluster husband Sobhuza (Jeff Obonyo), son Kecha (Shammah Nyagaka) and his wife Azawi (Lisa Odhiambo). It’s uncharacteristic of any media company I know, to hire staff who haven’t proven their talents or proclivity toward media in the past. But Nawalovu apparently has her plan. Nawalovu and Zenali in Lovers Lava at Kenya Cultural Centre on February 13, 2022. PHOTO | MARGARETTA WA GACHERU | NMG She’s a lusty lady who’s first concern is to secretly satisfy that lust. She does so initially with her Mkorino driver (Nyerere S.O.). Acting like a sexual aggressor, she informs him of her desire and plan to get him a flat where they can secretly meet. He can hardly say no. Later, she gives her newest hire, the tall, bright, and handsome Harvard grad, Zelani (Waya Maxwell) a similar ultimatum. She even offers him the title of General Manager to lure him into her cougar lair. But those are just a few of Nawalovu’s eruptive moments. Before she reveals her sexual preferences, she plays the tough, autocratic CEO who momentarily makes her son the company’s GM and his wife, a house help rather than the ‘content creator’ she was supposed to be. Her relations with her spouse have been dead for some time so she treats him as worse than useless. But as she emphasizes to all three, she’s their sole provider, feeding, clothing, and housing them, so they’d better be grateful. Kecia and Azawi never had much chemistry between them. If they were meant to be sweethearts as Awazi remembers once-upon-a-time, he gets a big head once his mum promotes him. Once he accepts his mum’s new appointment, he begins lording over the house help wife. He even accepts his mom’s other plan that he divorces Azawi with immediate effect and marry Zela (Sky Kapwe), Nawalovu’s other attractive new hire. The real explosions begin to fly once Zela gets bored with her new spouse Kecha and decides Zelani is a much finer catch. It takes quite some time in this slow-going play to reach this pivotal moment when the heat gets up to a boil, and the lovers get hot and bothered right there on stage. Both parties are carelessly betraying their partners as Zela cheats on Kecha while Zelani doing the same to Nawalovu. But as we previously noted, volcanic lava is uncontrollable as is the sensual slow dancing of the elicit couple. Cast of Lovers lava. PHOTO | MARGARETTA WA GACHERU | NMG Naturally, the Grand Dame of Media shows up at the Club where Zela and Zelani have tossed their cares to the wind and display what’s between them for all, including Nawalovu to plainly see. She’s shocked, of course. But once they all get back to the office, she tries to re-seize control of the situation. But she can’t. First, she sacks Zela but commands Zelani to stay. He refuses and leaves with his new lady. Kecha stands aghast as his second marriage is now shattered by his mum. But then, the most surprising eruption spills out as Sobhuza, the ‘useless’ husband announces he too is leaving, and with none other than Azawi who is pregnant by him. He’s just gotten a new position with all the perks included, in spite of his wife’s negativity. The twist of course is that Azawi and Kecha had never had kids, and Azawi had bewalen blamed for it. Even so, she’d remained loyal and supportive of Kecha when he was jobless and depressed, unlike Nawalovu’ss treatment of Sobuza when he had been in a similar situation. Ultimately, it’s the ‘true love’ of Zela and Zelani as well as Azawi and Sobuza that prove to be where the ‘lava’ comes from. Nawalovu’s immoral attitude finally leaves her loveless and alone. The same with Kecha who’d aligned himself with his mum rather than take his own stand and be his own person.