Xylem Africa strategy and marketing manager Chetan Mistry (left) with Xylem business development manager for East Africa Reuben Kogi at the opening of the Nairobi office at Garden City Business Park on February 21, 2022. PHOTO | DIANA NGILA | NMG American water solutions provider Xylem has set up an office in Nairobi with eyes on state and commercial projects in East Africa. Nairobi is the second hub after Johannesburg, South Africa, in the continent, with plans to set up others in Egypt and Morrocco. Xylem said the local office will support its projects in Tanzania, Ethiopia, Uganda, Burundi, Somalia and Rwanda. “Opening offices in Nairobi has been in the pipeline because East Africa is a strong and growing market for Xylem,” said Reuben Marowa, the director of Xylem East Africa. The firm water solutions include pumps, turbines, wastewater treatment, and meters. Some of its local clients include power producer KenGen, Nairobi City Water and Sewerage Company, and Nairobi Gate Industrial Park. “Kenya has many challenges around water, ranging from basic access to improving delivery. Through the regional office, we can provide additional services and support to Kenya and its neighbours,” said Mr Marowa. Xylem has also undertaken water supply projects in Orkesumet, Tanzania, and Bekoji, Ethiopia. In Rwanda, the firm supplied pumps for the offshore methane-to-power producer Shema Power Lake Kivu. Reuben Kogi, Xylem business development manager in East Africa, said utility firms have been under pressure due to increased urbanisation and growing population. The company, listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), said it is also looking to partner with non-governmental organisations, especially in dry areas, to ensure water reaches the people below the economic pyramid. “We have aqua towers and aqua blocks technologies in other regions that we can deploy and supply water to families during drought or flooding,” said Chetan Mistry, Africa Strategy and Marketing Manager, Xylem.  The Nairobi office has six staff members and a showroom at Garden City.