Student loan beneficiaries at Helb offices in Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG More than 75,000 first-year students are yet to receive State loans after the Higher Education Loans Board (Helb) ran out of cash, punishing them to a tough life at the beginning of their university education. The Helb said the freshmen, who joined public universities in September, will have to wait till the Treasury offers it Sh3 billion for initial disbursement. The majority of loan applicants come from poor households and require financial support from Helb to pay for their tuition and upkeep. The agency has blamed the turn of events on inadequate allocation and delayed release of cash by the Treasury, which triggered the cash crunch amid rising defaults from former university students in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic that led to layoffs, business closures and a freeze in hiring. The delayed disbursement means that the first-year students will have to find alternative means of paying for their tuition, accommodation and upkeep as they await government funding. Helb is supposed to be a revolving fund in which beneficiaries who have completed studies payback to support a fresh group of students. Lawmakers have been pushing to increase the grace period for Helb loans repayment to five years after graduation, to allow beneficiaries time to stabilise financially. The fact that the average allocation per student has also dropped from Sh43,000 to the current Sh37,000 makes the case for urgent reforms to support the institution to find alternative financing models. But as a short-term measure, the National Treasury must prioritise these allocations since this delay is hurting the poor the most and will have the unfortunate consequence of reversing the gains in making university education accessible. The quality of graduates that Kenya has, courtesy of the student loans, has made the country one of the most attractive destinations for investors on the continent. Government officials should never lose sight of that.