Kimani Isaac at the “Poleni: Loss, Grief, & Healing" concert. PHOTO | POOL As the world comes to terms with the reality of the post-Covid lifestyle, one of the art forms that have grown in influence and been a source of healing amidst the anguish and pain has been music. Music has been a therapeutic channel to deal with the sense of loss of the last two years. For Nairobi music concert organiser Abdi Rashid Jibril of Roots International, the restrictions on public gatherings meant that he put events with physical attendance on hold for almost two years. That is until three weeks ago when he brought together artists with amazing talents who reflect the diversity of contemporary Kenyan music to perform at a concert with the objective of healing from the pain and loss of loved ones during the pandemic. Themed “Poleni: Loss, Grief and Healing in Pandemic Times,” the performances were also to recognise the struggles by people to survive the socio-economic setbacks occasioned by the pandemic. Olivia Ambani at the “Poleni: Loss, Grief, & Healing" concert. PHOTO | POOL Few sectors have been as hard hit as the music business and so for the artists on the bill, this concert was also about emerging from a period when many of them were out of work and few were lucky to scrape a living through virtual shows. “It was intended as a medium of healing and recovery for those of us affected and serve as a moment of reflection and give a point of departure for all of us to envision our post Covid recovery both for artists and the community at large,” says Rashid. Within the outdoor setting of the Nairobi National Museum, to conform to the health protocols, three of the country’s most soulful voices entertained, soothed, and comforted an audience that attended both physically and streamed online with positive, heartwarming, and uplifting lyrics. Under music director, Kato Change, the renowned instrumentalist, who also played lead guitar for all performers, the songs were tastefully curated to reflect the reality of the times. Lyrics to reminisce on the fond memories shared with departed relations and friends, and hope and optimism of emerging from a dark period to embrace the promise of the future. Singer-songwriter and All Africa Music Awards nominee Olivia Ambani opened with “Let It” a song with reassuring lyrics about emerging from a painful season and trying to come to terms with the anguish of painful experiences. As she sings: “Just remember the days when sadness was a thing of the past, you’ll make it through.” “I have learned in the last two years to accept myself unconditionally and this is an important time to remember love not just for others but ourselves,” says Olivia referencing her song “Yes, I Love You.” Her set also included “Shoulder” a song about not being ashamed to ask for help, performed to the accompaniment of piano played by George Nyoro before closing her set with the funky “Better Than Just Fine” with its optimistic lyrics about the promise of a better day. For singer and guitarist Maia von Lekow the pandemic has been a period of mixed feelings. She welcomed her first child in August, as she revealed on stage during the show, but also knew many close friends who lost loved ones during the last two years. Maia von Lekow at the “Poleni: Loss, Grief, & Healing" concert. PHOTO | POOL Her set contained her originals such as “Jikomboe” a rumba flavoured song which she wrote about a friend who survived domestic violence. She chose the song to raise awareness about families who have borne the brunt of the high rate of domestic violence during the pandemic. Maia performance also included “Lola” and a cover version of “Kiss Me” originally by Des’ree again backed by Nyoro on the keyboard. One of the shining new lights of Kenyan music, singer, songwriter and guitarist, Kimani Isaac proved just why he is such a highly regarded talent with a selection of songs based on his experiences and the reality of life. His set included “Usife Moyo” an encouragement not to give up on life no matter the circumstances, “For My Father” based on his father’s struggle with mental health issues, just like many people have experienced during the pandemic. Others were the rousing sing-along anthem of self-belief “Ushindi” and his debut release “Songa Mbele” a catchy rhythm about forging ahead and leaving mistakes behind. “This show was an outlet for fans to reflect on life’s challenges and celebrate their departed loved ones and the array of performances managed to achieve that,” says concert director Kato Change.