A bar counter at Nyambari shopping centre in Lari. PHOTO | ERIC WAINAINA | NMG What kind of men run clubs and bars? Traditionally, I thought they were burly men with thick wrists and who smelled of steak. Men who fancy hats, silver chains, and a chunky ring on their little finger and breathed heavily. Most likely snored in their sleep. If they were not burly then they were very skinny. Most had toothpicks sticking out their lips. And, oh, they possessed two mobile phones which never stopped ringing and read their SMSs with a constipated look, a look they constantly wore. The girls who loved them chewed gum and were called Sally. So when my friend Emmanuel said he had opened a bar/club, The Kraft on Fortis Tower, Westlands, Nairobi I was a bit perplexed. He does not fit that look. He is quintessentially blue-collar, very well (and soft) spoken, and wears suits or snazzy blazers. He’s a dandy. Fine, he’s skinny, but.. I was over at his club/bar on Saturday evening to see for myself. Large open space, about 8,500 square feet, well-aerated with one whole side open into the streets, very comfortable high chairs, and about 27 taps of craft beer which they brew in-house in a microbrewery. His dream, he says, was to be the biggest microbrewery in Kenya. However, Covid-19 also had a dream; to be the biggest spanner in the works. Covid’s dream won, temporarily. He still has those plans. Fridays and Saturdays are their busiest days. There is a deejay. Saturday was full-house, with a great number of the Indian community. [Some of his partners are Indians] I had a nice chicken steak. Emmanuel did not walk the floor as you see in movies. We held court at his table with one of his partners called Njoroge. Occasionally, a staff member would come and whisper something in his ear, like in the movies. His eyes were always on the floor, looking, searching, recording like a camera. “Hey,” I said, “is your wife called Sally?” He told me it wasn’t. “Why?” He asked. I said nothing. I can confidently report that she isn’t called Sally.