Tuskys director Stephen Mukuha Kamau. FILE PHOTO | NMG Stephen Mukuha, a director of struggling retail supermarket Tuskys Supermarket is dead.  Family sources said Mr Mukuha died on Sunday at a Nairobi hospital. Mr Mukuha and his brothers Mr Yusuf Mugweru, Mr Gachwe Sammy Gatei owned a 17.5 percent stake in Tuskys each, in documents filed in court. John Kago, Mary Njoki and Mary Njeri (deceased) were listed as holding a 10 percent stake each. In 2016, Mr Mukuha and his brother Gachwe were charged with theft of Sh1.64 billion from the retail chain, as the siblings fought for the control of the company.  The siblings later put aside their differences as they tried to revive the retail chain from unnamed Mauritian investor, with a capital injection of Sh2.1 billion. His death comes at a time when the former retail chain giant is fighting forced closure of its outlets by landlords, suppliers and banks with a debt in excess of Sh10 billion. Tuskys, which was at one time the country’s largest by sales and branches after the collapse of Nakumatt Holdings, has closed tens of stores across the country including major towns like Mombasa and Kisumu. Last year, the retail chain opted to sell assets in some of its branches to avoid liquidation by more than 60 creditors following delays in receiving a Sh1.6 billion debt from an undisclosed Mauritius firm. The management revealed that it had resolved to sell non-core assets, with plans to generate about Sh911 million as per documents filed in court.  “The sale of non-core assets has been set out in the Applicant’s recovery plan as one of the sources of capital to finance the Applicant’s recovery, aside from its investors’ capital injection. It is also a key aspect of the Applicant’s plan to trim down its branch network,” Tuskys said. The supermarket chain pleaded with the court to freeze the cases and allow it continue repay the debts, arguing that its financial position remains redeemable and its business commercially viable. Tuskys Supermarkets started experiencing troubles since 2011 when the shareholders, who are all siblings, disagreed over the direction of the retail chain. Then, Mr Mugweru, accused family members of mismanagement and even attempted to wind up the retailer. At the same time, three of his siblings - John, Stephen and George - accused him of attempting a takeover through the back door. As part of the recovery plan, Tuskys revealed that it got a capital injection of Sh2.1 billion from unnamed investors but who only released Sh500 million as a commitment, with the funds aimed at stabilising operations to make it more attractive to strategic investors it is courting.