University of Nairobi scholar Bitange Ndemo. FILE PHOTO | NMG University of Nairobi scholar Bitange Ndemo is part of an international research team that has been awarded a €1.4 million (Sh180 million) grant to examine regulations on the collection and migration of health data from Africa. Christened “There is no app for this! Regulating the migration of health apps in Sub-Saharan Africa”, the grant was awarded under the Mobility – Global Medicine and Health Research Programme. Mobile applications have become an essential tool as most sectors digitise their operations. Their popularity, though, has come at a cost. Findings of a pilot research project conducted by the team shows that most health apps are owned and operated by foreign companies. Consequently, health data captured by these apps migrates to developed countries. This migration of data is either poorly regulated or unregulated. It’s estimated that health data from more than 40 million Africans is ‘‘harvested’’ by digital companies in the west every year in what researchers call ‘‘digital colonialism.” This data ends up profiting outsiders, they argue. Prof Ndemo will work with professors Sharifah Sekalala (Warwick Law School) and Pamela Andanda (University of Witwatersrand). The trio will examine ways of constructing regulatory solutions around health data migration, with a focus on Kenya, Uganda and South Africa. They will also work with civil society organisations, app developers and regulators to co-create guidelines for data regulation. Prof Ndemo said the need to interrogate emerging concepts from the health apps is urgent. He added: “The funding comes at the right time when there is a growing list of health hubs in Africa, especially those that are building health wallets that will have a long-term effect on the people of Africa.” Organisers say that the project will highlight global inequities associated with health data migration while promoting equitable approaches to the collection and handling of data. Jkgitau@ke.nationmedia.com