Equity Bank branch on Muindi Mbingu Street in Nairobi on Thursday, April 1, 2021. PHOTO | DENNIS ONSONGO | NMG A Chinese firm has failed to block Equity Bank from releasing Sh77.2 million paid as security after a botched deal for the construction of houses worth Sh3 billion in Mombasa. Justice David Majanja ruled that China Gansu International Corporation for Economic Cooperation Kenya cannot stop the developer, Goldrgen Gulf International Ltd from calling for the bid bond, after failing to perform the contract. The developer invited the Chinese company to construct 522 housing units in Mombasa worth Sh3 billion in May last year. The Chinese firm was supposed to get security worth 2.5 percent of the contract from a reputable bank. The contractor obtained the security from Equity Bank. Golden Gulf subsequently accused the Chinese firm of failing to execute the contract. China Gansu blamed the developer saying the contract did not have a time frame and it was wrong to call the bid bond. Justice Majanja said in his ruling that the contractor cannot stop the Bank from paying up on demand because the lender is not even privy to the agreement between the two companies. “The call up of the Bid Bond was unqualified and categorical as it stipulated that the bank was to pay upon receipt of a first written demand,” the judge said adding that Equity was obliged to pay and it mattered not that a dispute existed between the parties. The Chinese company alleges that the developer induced it to get the security well aware that it had no intention to enter into the contract. Its general manager Zou Qili revealed that the parties were engaged in negotiations over the terms of the contract and that there was no period for execution hence there was no requirement for a performance guarantee. The developer said on its part the Chinese firm failed to perform the contract and provide the performance bond, as required without any justifiable cause. skiplagat@ke.nationmedia.com The court heard that the only explanation given by the Chinese firm for the failure to perform the contract was that it had been forwarded to its head office in China for execution. The developer said before recalling the security, it held a meeting at the bank’s headquarters in the presence of one of the Chinese firm’s lawyers, among others to extend the security and enable the company to prepare the performance bond and a signed contract but instead, the firm chose to move to court. The Chinese firm lost a similar application last year when Justice Majanja ruled that the firm could not question the Bank’s legal obligations or ask the court to hear the dispute without the Bank’s participation.