The African Union Commission in conjunction with other development partners will mark the annual Africa Integration Day on Thursday, July 7, 2022, followed by the Boma of Africa festival in a virtual conference on Friday. In the chain of events outlined in the African Union calendar, a physical event shall be held in Lusaka Zambia between Wednesday, July 6 and Friday, July 8 to explore the e-commerce potential of the Single African Market. On Friday, the Boma of Africa will make its third return in a three-part exposition of major pan-African initiatives coupled with a global symposium to take stock of progress made towards the attainment of AU’s agenda 2063. The first part of the Boma will focus on the launch of a continental trading corridor by former Niger president Mahamadou Issifou to promote the implementation of the Africa Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) agreement. This AfCFTA hub concept brings together the AfCFTA secretariat, national governments as well as major private sector innovators in a unified digital framework called the AfCFTA Hub Network. The second part of the Boma will bring together Heads of State and business executives to deliberate on critical issues shaping Africa’s long-term strategy for social-economic transformation. The final phase of the Boma will be the climax of the event. It will bring together African Union departments and agencies in deliberations on a continental eHealth backbone. The African Vaccine Passport shall be launched by the Africa CDC with support from other international partners. The Boma of Africa festival is a series of insightful convenings to drive the African integration agenda through a strategic high-level engagement between the continental governance institutions, represented by the AU Commission, and the African private sector, represented by the AU's strategic partner AfroChampions. The festival aims at bringing together all the 55 member states of the African Union who cover a market of more than 1.3 billion people. Interested participants can register for the virtual Boma event via www.africaboma.com/boma2022/register