Principal Secretary Transport Dr Eng. Joseph Njoroge. PHOTO | DIANA NGILA | NMG The transport ministry is seeking to return normalcy on the roads through awards that will motivate commercial vehicles to operate in compliance with traffic laws. The Afrika Mashariki Awards, an initiative of the Ministry of Transport with the Nation Media Group as one of the partners, will see winners feted during the ceremony to be held later in the week. Principal Secretary in the Ministry of Transport Joseph Njoroge says the award will make more commercial vehicles, especially the passenger service ones comply with the traffic rules, which will in turn assure passengers of their safety. “The company that will win this award will attract more passengers as the travellers will have the appetite to use it more than the others. The award has a lot of brand value that will boost their business,” said Eng Njoroge. “The award may not have huge monetary value but the impact that will create to the company will be more important in terms of their reputation,” he added. The PS said the award will be given to the transport companies that have exceeded the expectation of passengers in terms of service. Afrika Mashariki Transport Awards is the first of its kind in Kenya and East Africa, celebrating excellence in the transport industry. The Award will be preceded by a nomination/media night and a three-day Transport Expo. The transport expo will start on Wednesday before culminating in a gala night on Friday this week. The PS said this year’s award will only feature Kenyan companies but going forward it will be extended to other East African countries. “This year we are focusing on Kenya but these are awards that will be extended regionally in the coming years,” he said. Matatu operators in the country have for a long been accused of flouting traffic rules what has led to high cases of deaths on the road and the government wants to use these awards as a tool to correct this. gandae@ke.nationmedia.com