In Kenya, the operations of start-ups and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are largely financed from entrepreneurs’ pockets or short-term bank loans. However, financing such investments which are supposed to yield return in average-term or long-term by short-term bank loans, brings out negative results in the aspect of banks and entrepreneurs alike. From data by the Central Bank of Kenya, only eight percent of loans held in commercial banks were by small enterprises and five percent to medium enterprises as at December 2020. This proves traditional finance to be helpless in supporting SMEs that make up to 98 percent of all businesses and are the largest employer having a third of employees. Consequently, such organisations that are supposed to vitalise the economy and industries have to work out alternative financing methods. With globalisation, nations and markets have come closer, developments in communication and technology alongside market actions have become cross-border. Hence, entrepreneurs have been set free of traditional financing. Such diversity in financing methods has significantly contributed to the development levels of nations by influencing countries’ entrepreneurship activities in a positive manner. Private equity (PE), which makes up the subject, stands out as one of the alternative factors supporting entrepreneurship. It is ownership or interest in an entity that is not publicly listed or traded. Kenya’s Regulatory framework for PE started in 2000 where the Capital Markets Act provided for the Capital Markets Authority (CMA) to register qualifying venture capital (VC) firms. Since then, the Capital Markets (Registered Venture Capital Companies) Regulations, 2007 were enacted to facilitate the operations of VC firms in Kenya. As of June 30, 2020, the Capital Markets Act was amended to enable the CMA to license, approve and regulate private equity and venture capital companies that have access to public funds. One of the greatest handicaps of this financing is liquidity risk. We need to address this by the capital markets creating a means to smoothly trade private stocks. PE companies are professional financial transmitters which can transfer gathered resources and channel them to innovative, inventing, and dynamic entrepreneurs as long-term funding.