Urbanus Wambua Musyoka. He is being investigated by the anti-graft agency. PHOTO | POOL The court has frozen a residential property worth millions of shillings belonging to a Machakos County executive accused of accumulating properties worth Sh637 million through corruption. The High Court barred Urbanus Wambua Musyoka from selling or transferring the house under construction in Machakos County, together with two motor vehicles and money in two bank accounts totalling Sh11.5 million. Also frozen is a land in the Kibauni area in Mwala. Justice Esther Maina directed the freeze to remain in force until May 26 when she will give further directions on the case. The judge directed Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) to serve Mr Musyoka with the court documents. “That the first defendant, his agents or any other persons is restrained from withdrawing, transferring, disposing of, wasting or in any other way, dealing with the funds held in the following bank accounts,” said the judge. The EACC says in the petition that it has been investigating Mr Musyoka from January 2014 and July 2021 and discovered that he exploited his official position for private gain by engaging in transactions that conflicted with the public interest. The anti-graft body says the official conferred benefits to himself by awarding tenders and contracts to companies linked to his wife, brother and associates. The companies include Wafih International Limited, Wisdom Holdings Limited, Wemmar Enterprises Limited and Kikoto General Merchants Limited. Further, the EACC says the contracts were not competitive showing that he circumvented procurement and other relevant laws. Money was later wired to his bank accounts or those held by his proxies and which he used to acquire the properties. In total, he allegedly received Sh457 million between the said period yet his net salary for the said period amounted to Sh16.2 million. “During the period under investigations, the first defendant acquired land property and other assets valued at Sh105,809,831.00. The total cumulative value of all these assets less his salary earned during the period of interest amounted to Sh637,153,870.80,” the EACC said in the petition. The EACC said they sought an explanation from Wisdom Holdings Ltd and its directors allegedly said they were not aware of the transaction totaling Sh129.8 million but indicated that had introduced Mr Musyoka as a signatory to the account and he did all the transactions. Further, the companies in question allegedly failed to remit taxes due to Kenya Revenue Authority amounting to Sh181.7 million. ***UPDATED