L-R Sam Gichuru, CEO of Kidato School, Maureen Ambakhane, Founder of Nyayo Soko Mumus, and Chris Odongo, CEO WYLDE International during the launch of the SME Access to Finance Research Research Report. PHOTO | POOL About six in 10 Kenyan small businesses were denied financing by financial institutions in the last three years, a new report showing, coming at a time when a majority of them were struggling under the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. A new report by Wylde International dubbed 'SME Access to Financing' shows that approximately 60 percent of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) were denied credits, exposing them to financial difficulties. The report attributes the financing snub to lack of collateral as the major reason for declining the much-needed financing, followed by the startup state being associated with limited experience in running the business as well as low business turnover.  Wylde International Head of Strategy Kiriinya Kithinji says collateral is viewed as a disincentive to the majority of SMEs in accessing loans.  “Other reasons include being listed on the Credit Reference Bureau, lack of consistency in the bank statements, lack of business permit. Alternative less restrictive financing requirements should be reimagined and adopted to enable businesses access funding,” he said.  According to the report, debt financing provided by banks, micro-finance institutions and non-banking institutions are preferred SMEs than equity financing, which stringent investment assessment. Working capital stood out as the dominant purpose for financing received followed by asset financing, and product diversification.  Out of the businesses that are planning to get financing in the near future, most of them are seeking the funding for expansion followed by working capital.  Furthermore, seven in very ten businesses that plan to get financing need additional support with linkages to financiers, followed by preparing a winning business plan in order to access financing.  “SMEs should properly account for project financing and maintain proper financial records for financial accounting, auditing and reporting purposes to the involved stakeholders. SMEs also need to develop winning financial proposals, presentations and pitches to potential financiers. Enhancing peer-to-peer networking and sharing of ideas with like- minded entrepreneurs that seek to learn from the best practices and challenges encountered,” he said. Aiming to drive a culture of data driven decision making, WYLDE International conducted a baseline customized mobile-based survey.  The survey, which was conducted throughout November 2021, involved 140 SMEs operating in Kenya. The businesses which participated in the study, operated from the 47 counties of Kenya except for Mandera county.  “On the side of SME ecosystems, there is need for a performance-based loans and incentives for innovation in SMEs growth. There is need to provide capacity-building grants and technical assistance to expand lending activities to reach all SMEs." kvnrotich@gmail.com