Every financial year, the Treasury Cabinet secretary presents the budget policy statement to the National Assembly, outlining the government revenues and expenditure. The Treasury, in approving budget estimates, also enacts the Appropriation Bill and other Bills required to implement the budgetary proposals. In the just-concluded budget speech, the minister, Ukur Yatani, tabled before the August House a Sh3.63 trillion budget that will allow public sector entities to receive their equitable share from the exchequer. As it is, the national and county governments operate on cash basis accounting that recognises revenues and expenses at the time cash is received or paid out. This framework is limited as it does not account for government assets and liabilities, which are key to sound decision-making. Implementing a roadmap to accrual accounting is a critical milestone in overcoming this challenge. To address the weakness of cash accounting, public sector entities must embrace accrual accounting, a system which records revenues when earned and expenses when incurred rather than when payments are made. Accrual-based accounting creates the ability to recognise the value and manage public sector assets and liabilities. The advantage of the accrual framework is that revenue is matched against the expenses incurred in a given financial period. Accrual accounting, therefore, presents a true and fair view of the state of affairs of any given entity at any particular time. In Africa, countries such as Tanzania and Nigeria have adopted International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) accrual accounting for efficient and effective use of public funds -- which is bearing fruit. Adopting accrual accounting will enhance better public service delivery, leading to improved performance in a manner that ensures value for money. The accrual-based framework enhances transparency, accountability, and fiscal credibility and guides the production of useful information for decision-making. In the quest to improve the management of public sector liabilities, accrual accounting provides helpful information that will allow any government to adopt decisions that support its objectives without burdening future generations with unsustainable debt. It will also create a fiscal mechanism with targets that recognise the impact of decision-making on the public sector’s balance sheet. Without this, there will be a significant temptation to shift costs outside the scope of fiscal targets — even where such a decision would not provide value for money. Financial reports prepared using an accrual basis give a more holistic view of any government’s financial position. The additional information provided means that government decision-makers are better informed on the range of liabilities and risks facing the public sector and can consider steps to mitigate these challenges. Embracing accrual accounting can address these hurdles. Public Sector Accounting Standards Board of Kenya mandate, as enshrined in the Public Finance Management Act of 2012, has outlined a detailed roadmap for transition to IPSAS accrual for public sector entities.